
800 East 96th Street,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46240 USA
MINECRAFT
Stephen O’Brien
The Ultimate Player’s Guide to
ii The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
Copyright © 2014 by Que Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book shall be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from
the publisher. No patent liability is assumed with respect to the use of
the information contained herein. Although every precaution has been
taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and author assume
no responsibility for errors or omissions. Nor is any liability assumed for
damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7897-5223-9
ISBN-10: 0-7897-5223-9
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013946682
Printed in the United States of America
Sixth Printing February 2014
Trademarks
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or
service marks have been appropriately capitalized. Que Publishing cannot
attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of a term in this book should
not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark.
Minecraft is a trademark of Notch Development AB.
Warning and Disclaimer
Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and as accurate
as possible, but no warranty or fi tness is implied. The information provided
is on an “as is” basis. The author and the publisher shall have neither
liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss or
damages arising from the information contained in this book.
Bulk Sales
Que Publishing offers excellent discounts on this book when ordered in
quantity for bulk purchases or special sales. For more information, please
contact
U.S. Corporate and Government Sales
1-800-382-3419
corpsales@pearsontechgroup.com
For sales outside of the U.S., please contact
International Sales
international@pearsoned.com
Editor-in-Chief
Greg Wiegand
Executive Editor
Rick Kughen
Development Editor
Rick Kughen
Managing Editor
Sandra Schroeder
Project Editor
Seth Kerney
Copy Editor
Gill Editorial Services
Indexer
Ken Johnson
Proofreader
Jess DeGabriele
Technical Editor
Timothy L. Warner
Publishing
Coordinator
Kristen Watterson
Book Designer
Mark Shirar
Compositor
Bronkella Publishing

iii
Contents at a Glance
 Introduction 1
CHAPTER 1 Getting Started 7
CHAPTER 2 First-Night Survival 23
CHAPTER 3 Gathering Resources 47
CHAPTER 4 Mining 69
CHAPTER 5 Combat School 83
CHAPTER 6 Crop Farming 103
CHAPTER 7 Taming Mobs 125
CHAPTER 8 Creative Construction 137
CHAPTER 9 Redstone, Rails, and More 159
CHAPTER 10 Enchanting, Anvils, and Brewing 195
CHAPTER 11 Villages and Other Structures 217
CHAPTER 12 Playing Through: The Nether and The End 231
CHAPTER 13 Mods and Multiplayer 251
APPENDIX A Crafting Recipes (Online)
 Index 273
iv The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
Table of Contents
 Introduction 1
What’s in This Book 2
How to Use This Book 4
Crafting Recipes 4
There’s More Online… 5
Chapter 1 Getting Started 7
Registering and Downloading 7
Registering a Mojang Account 8
Purchasing Minecraft 10
Launching Minecraft 12
Starting a New Game 14
Choosing a World Generation Style 16
Singleplayer Game Modes 16
Seeding Your World 18
Controls 19
The Bottom Line 20
Chapter 2 First-Night Survival 23
Survive and Thrive 23
Head for the Trees 25
Using Your Inventory 27
Build a Crafting Table 29
Let’s Build Some Tools 30
Creating a Shelter 33
The Furnace Is Your Friend 38
Let There Be Light 39
Slumber with Lumber 41
The Bottom Line 44
Chapter 3 Gathering Resources 47
Introducing the HUD 47
Improving Your Tools 51
Chests: Safely Stash Your Stuff 54
Table of Contents v
Avoiding Monsters 55
Hunger Management 58
Your Mission: Food, Resources, and Reconnaissance 59
Food on the Run 61
Finding a Building Site 63
A Resourceful Guide to the Creative Mode Inventory 66
The Bottom Line 68
Chapter 4 Mining 69
Dig Deep, My Friend 69
The Mining Layer Cake Guide 71
Lava Lakes and Other Pitfalls 73
Descending to Layer 11 74
The 2x1 Ladder Descent 74
The Straight Staircase 76
The Spiral Staircase 77
Layouts for Fast, Efficient Mining 78
Staying Safe While You Mine 81
The Bottom Line 82
Chapter 5 Combat School 83
Introducing the Menagerie 83
Zombies 84
Spiders 86
Skeletons 87
Cave Spiders 88
Spider Jockeys 89
Creepers 89
Slimes 90
Endermen 91
Zombie Pigmen 91
Defensive Mobs 92
Snow Golems 92
Iron Golems 93
vi The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
Weapons and Armor 94
Swordcraft 95
Bows and Arrows 95
Armor-All 98
Color Coordinate Your Leather 100
The Bottom Line 101
Chapter 6 Crop Farming 103
Choosing a Crop 103
Establishing a Farm 106
Automated Farms 113
Creating a Piston Harvester 117
Sticky Piston Harvesting 119
Creating a Water Harvester 119
Harvesting Other Crops 122
The Bottom Line 123
Chapter 7 Taming Mobs 125
Farming and Working with Friendly Mobs 125
Using Leads 128
Breeding Animals 129
Taming and Riding Horses, Donkeys, and More 130
Armoring Your Horse 132
Loading Up the Pack 133
Riding Pigs 134
Fishing 134
The Bottom Line 135
Chapter 8 Creative Construction 137
Leaving the Cave 137
Unleashing Your Interior Decorator 140
Building Underwater 147
Protecting Your Perimeter 153
Become a Ditch Witch 153
Mob Pitfalls 155
Thick as a Brick 157
The Bottom Line 157
Table of Contents vii
Chapter 9 Redstone, Rails, and More 159
Seeing Red: A Beginner’s Guide 160
Power Sources 160
Redstone Wiring 164
Powered Blocks 166
Modifiers 167
Repeaters 168
Comparators 170
Output Devices 171
Automatic Doors 173
Vertical Currents 178
Advanced Circuits 180
NOT Gates, aka Inverters 180
OR Gates, or Any Input Will Do 181
AND Gates, Two True 182
Repeater Loops 184
Rail Transport 185
Have Minecart, Will Travel 186
Rolling on Rails 188
Making Tracks and Stations 190
T-Junctions 191
Halfway Stations 192
A Word About Hoppers 193
The Bottom Line 194
Chapter 10 Enchanting, Anvils, and Brewing 195
Enchanting Wiles 195
Creating and Mining Obsidian 197
Crafting Books 200
Casting Enchantments 200
Improving Enchantment Chances with Bookshelves 202
Earning and Managing Experience 203
Spruce Up Your Weapons 204
Enhance Your Armor 205
Improve Your Tools 206
viii The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
Hammer It Out with the Anvil 207
Brewing Potions 209
Brewing Up a Storm 211
Enhancing Potions 214
The Bottom Line 215
Chapter 11 Villages and Other Structures 217
Village Life 217
Emerald City: Your Ticket to Trade 220
Hidden Temples and Other Structures 222
Desert Temples 223
Jungle Temples 224
Witch Huts 224
Dungeons 225
Abandoned Mineshafts 226
Strongholds 226
Nether Fortresses 227
Mapping, or There and Back Again 227
Crafting a Clock 229
The Bottom Line 230
Chapter 12 Playing Through: The Nether and The End 231
Alternate Dimensions 231
Getting to The Nether 234
Portal Magic 236
Surviving the Nether Fortress 239
Nether Mobs 240
The End Game 242
Finding a Stronghold 244
Defeating the Ender Dragon 246
The Bottom Line 250
Table of Contents ix
Chapter 13 Mods and Multiplayer 251
Customizing Your Experience 251
Changing the Skin You’re In 252
Minecraft Skin Editors 253
Skincraft 253
Minecraftskins 253
Novaskin 254
Resource Packs: Change Your World 255
Mind My Mods 258
Installing Forge Mods 259
Too Many Items 261
More Explosives 262
Super Heroes 262
REI’s MiniMap 263
Legendary Beasts 263
More Mobs 264
Multiplayer Madness 265
Sharing and Joining on LAN 266
Joining a Multiplayer Server 267
Hosting a Multiplayer Server 269
The Bottom Line 272
Appendix A Crafting Recipes (Online)
 Index 273
x The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
About the Author
Stephen O’Brien is an Australian-born writer and entrepreneur currently residing in Sydney
after too many years in Silicon Valley. He has previously written 27 books across multiple
editions with publishers such as Prentice-Hall and Que, including several best-selling titles.
He also founded Typefi, the world’s leading automated publishing system, and in his
spare time he invented a new type of espresso machine called mypressi. He has been playing Minecraft since its earliest days and remains astounded at the unparalleled creativity it
engenders.
Acknowledgments xi
Dedication
To Mika, who at age nine taught his dad to laugh hysterically at the sight of a pig riding up a mountain in a
minecart. Laughs and love always, dear boy.
Acknowledgments
It’s an author’s dream to work with a talented team, and I feel like I’m having a better
dream than most. After 12 years away from Que working on entrepreneurial projects, I was
incredibly fortunate to step straight back into the fold of a fantastic group. I’d like to thank
Rick Kughen for his outstanding project direction, polished editorial efforts, and always
gentle prompting even as I started to run behind schedule. Rick, it’s such a true pleasure to
work with you again. Seth Kerney, thank you for so smoothly shepherding this book through
the numerous stages of the publishing process. Karen Gill, I appreciate your thorough, precise copyediting and constantly joyful feedback. Mark Shirar, you created a fantastic cover
and page design. And Tim Warner, thanks for a technical edit that truly left no block uncovered, no cobblestone unturned.
Writing a book always feels a long leap into the dark, with the only light often being close
family and friends. I thank you all, in particular my dad, Tony; my siblings, Justin, Adele,
and Siobhan; my dear friend Laura; and everyone else who gave me no end of encouragement, best wishes, and a chorus of variations on the very Australian “goodonya.”
Last, but by no means least, thank you, Amy, for your constant love, support, and encouragement.
xii The Ultimate Player’s Guide to Minecraft
We Want to Hear from You!
As the reader of this book, you are our most important critic and commentator. We value
your opinion and want to know what we’re doing right, what we could do better, what
areas you’d like to see us publish in, and any other words of wisdom you’re willing to pass
our way.
We welcome your comments. You can email or write to let us know what you did or didn’t
like about this book—as well as what we can do to make our books better.
Please note that we cannot help you with technical problems related to the topic of this book.
When you write, please be sure to include this book’s title and author as well as your name
and email address. We will carefully review your comments and share them with the author
and editors who worked on the book.
Email: feedback@quepublishing.com
Mail: Que Publishing
ATTN: Reader Feedback
800 East 96th Street
Indianapolis, IN 46240 USA
Reader Services
Visit our website and register this book at quepublishing.com/register for convenient access
to any updates, downloads, or errata that might be available for this book.
Introduction
Imagine waking one morning thrust from your soft, cozy bed into a strange new world. A square sun
crosses the sky. You have no tools or weapons—nothing but your bare, knobby hands. You briefly
survey the landscape. Hills and forests surround you. A cow lows in the distance.
On a hunch you look for a Horn of Plenty—anything that may deliver something useful. Every other
RPG you’ve played has plenty of stuff lying around. But it’s a fruitless search with no cache in sight.
Curiously, though, one of your random clicks does dig a hole in the ground. Interesting. But how
does it help? You try again. Another hole. Hmmm.
You continue your reconnaissance, admiring the varied terrain, soaring cliffs, verdant forests, and
clear blue lakes. It certainly is pleasing to the eye, but this universe seems to work by unfamiliar
rules. The sun is moving far too briskly across the sky, and nightfall now looks like it’s mere minutes
away.
That can’t be good.
You start a kind of random flail, clicking everything in sight. The trunk of a tree looks promising.
Aha! A block of wood falls to the ground. But what to do with it? You have to figure that out later.
Darkness descends, and with it comes an unearthly groan. Strange figures appear in the distant
gloom, lurching toward you. A slithering slurp shrieks into your senses from behind. A cold finger of
fear trips down your spine.
You run for the base of the nearest cliff. If your back’s against the wall, it might as well be a sturdy
one. Wait a moment. Is that the mouth of a cave? Perfect! A final quick dash sees you safely inside.
The darkness turns to an inky black. You stumble down a ledge putting more distance between you
and the horrifying creatures outside. Stop, breathe, look around.
You hear the briefest hiss, like a burning fuse. Frantically spinning to find the source, you catch a
glimpse of a ghastly green face. It’s the last you’ll see before a gigantic explosion claims your life.
Welcome to Minecraft and a typical experience for the millions of players who buy this game in everincreasing numbers on every major platform. Minecraft is, without doubt, one of the most interesting open-ended games ever produced. It’s also one of the most vexatious.
From the first moment I started playing this game, back in the beta, to today’s extraordinary experience, Minecraft has developed into a tour de force of absolutely splendid gameplay, but one that is
not easily accessible.
2 Introduction
Before I even thought about writing this book I found it popping up more and more frequently in random conversations among all age levels—everyone from my nine-year old’s
best friends going on up…way up. Minecraft’s unique open-endedness offers an equally
open-ended fascination to people of all ages. Fifty million of them, and counting.
Clearly, Minecraft was enjoying unparalleled success for an independent production, but
there was something strange going on. The game still lacked an in-depth tutorial or documentation of any sort. And while there is no paucity of online resources, how do you
explain a game where every block bends to your will; where the terrain can dance to your
tune; where an electrical system can do a crazy range of things including simulating its own
computer; and where other elements such as casting enchantments, brewing potions, and
finding a way to get to and defeat the final boss require some curiously specific, obtuse
steps and strategies?
The online community has stepped into that breach admirably, going to the point of
decompiling the code to understand and document specific game mechanics, but the essentials are often buried among hundreds of thousands of random Minecraft videos or tucked
in with other encyclopedically detailed documentation. And, among all that, there are literally thousands of junk sites trying to trick you into clicking on ads or installing malware.
This book fills the gap, bringing together all the key information you need in a single place.
Written from the player’s perspective, it takes you through the essentials and then far
beyond with all the background information, crafting recipes, strategies, and ideas you need
to make your Minecraft world truly your own. It covers everything from first-night survival
to hosting your own Multiplayer server.
If you are a parent wondering if Minecraft is suitable for your own kids, consider it to be as
far from a consumption-only experience as old-school rote learning is from an active education filled with exploration and discovery. Minecraft will inspire great feats of imagination
and a thirst for understanding how its many facets enmesh and evolve. Best of all, it’s like
one of those great movies or books that are marketed toward kids but entertain adults on a
whole other level. Play it together—even turn off the monsters through its creative or peaceful modes—and enjoy your time playing together with kids as young as four or five. But I
warn you, it’s addictive. Please remember to give them a go now and then.
No matter who you are or how you play, you’ll find Minecraft to be an endlessly fascinating, wonderful, enjoyable world. It’s going to be quite the journey!
What’s in This Book
Survive and thrive in Minecraft with 13 chapters of detailed step-by-step guides, tips, tricks,
and strategies. Each chapter in this book focuses on a key aspect of the game, from initial
survival to building an empire. Make the most of your Minecraft world today:
Q Chapter 1, “Getting Started,” will walk you through the steps needed to download and
install Minecraft, and start a new game, optionally using seeds to control the world generation.
What’s in This Book 3
Q Chapter 2, “First-Night Survival,” is an essential strategy guide to one of the most challenging times in Minecraft. You’ll learn to craft essential tools and build your first mobproof shelter, all in less than 10 minutes of gameplay.
Q Chapter 3, “Gathering Resources,” will fill out the skills you need to build a permanent
base of operations, create better tools, store resources, and find food to stave off hunger. I also show you how to use the built-in GPS so you can always find your way home,
even after extended forays into the wilds.
Q Chapter 4, “Mining,” unlocks some of Minecraft’s deepest secrets. I’ll show you the best
tunneling plan to uncover the most resources in the shortest possible time, the essential
tools required, and the layers you should dig to uncover everything from basic iron ore
to diamonds.
Q Chapter 5, “Combat School,” will get you ready to tackle any mob, including the
creeper. From sword-fighting techniques to armor, this chapter has you covered. You’ll
also learn the essential perimeter protection techniques for your home.
Q Chapter 6, “Crop Farming,” will help you become completely self-sufficient, ensuring
the hunger bar stays full, constantly boosting your health. Learn to hydrate 80 blocks of
farm land with a single water block, and automate your harvests at the touch of a
button.
Q Chapter 7, “Taming Mobs,” is all about Minecraft’s passive animals, the chickens,
pigs, cows, horses, and more that populate its world and provide you with valuable
resources. Learn to breed animals, tame Ocelots to scare off creepers, and gallop across
the world on horseback.
Q Chapter 8, “Creative Construction,” will help you unleash your inner architect. From
grand constructions to inventive interiors, learn about the decorative ways you can use
Minecraft’s blocks and items to build the perfect abode.
Q Chapter 9, “Redstone, Rails, and More,” empowers your world with a host of automated devices. Control redstone power, automated doors, send minecarts on missions,
and build stations, stopovers and more.
Q Chapter 10, “Enchanting, Anvils, and Brewing,” will have you brewing up a storm. Cast
spells, improve your weapons and armor, and fall from great heights with grace.
Q Chapter 11, “Villages and Other Structures,” is your key to interacting with the other
non-playing characters. Trade your way to better goods, and learn the secrets of the
game’s temples.
Q Chapter 12, “Playing Through: The Nether and The End,” is the strategy guide you’ll
need to get through these tricky sections of the game. Find a fortress fast, get what you
need, and then prepare for the Ender Dragon. It’s easy when you know how.
4 Introduction
Q Chapter 13, “Mods and Multiplayer,” will show you how to customize the game, from
new character skins to mods that add a host of functionality. And along the way you’ll
also learn how to access multiplayer games and set up a permanent world on your own
server for family and friends.
How to Use This Book
Throughout this book, you’ll see that I have called out some items as Notes, Tips, and
Cautions—all of which are explained here.
NOTE
Notes point out ancillary bits of information that are helpful but not crucial. They often
make for an interesting meander.
TIP
Tips point out a useful bit of information to help you solve a problem. They’re useful in
a tight spot.
CAUTION
Cautions alert you to potential disasters and pitfalls. Don’t ignore these!
Crafting Recipes
You’ll also see that I’ve included crafting recipes throughout this book. I’ve included the
actual ingredients in the text, so just match the pattern you see to create the item, as shown
here for a wooden pickaxe. It’s easy, and you’ll be surprised how quickly you can whip them
up after just a few uses.
There’s More Online… 5
There’s More Online…
In addition to the information packed between the covers of this book, I’ve put together a
complete guide to all the crafting recipes online. Feel free to download! Visit http://www.
quepublishing.com/register to register your book and download your free PDF copy.
This page intentionally left blank 
This page intentionally left blank 
3
Gathering Resources
In This Chapter
Q Never get lost. Learn the secrets of the HUD and its hidden GPS.
Q Improve your tools with more durable materials.
Q Safely store your hard-earned resources.
Q Learn the easy way to manage hunger.
Q Build your first outdoor shelter and enjoy the view.
Q Access the full Creative mode inventory.
Minecraft is filled to the brim with all manner of resources, and gathering them is the first step
toward getting the most out of the game. In Chapter 2, “First-Night Survival,” you put together a
pack of essentials sufficient to last the first night, but this is really just the smallest prequel to the
real game, and describing how to find, create, and use other types of resources forms much of this
book. This chapter is about building the foundation you can use to launch into the rest of the game.
Your focus is on a few key points: build an outdoor shelter, find food to stave off hunger, improve
your collection of tools, and build a chest to safely store items. This solidifies your position, making
your base more impervious to attack, allows you to do all sorts of Minecrafty things more efficiently,
and sets yourself up for longer excursions both above and below ground.
The good news is that you already have a base, so you can explore during the day, try not to lose
your way, and head back at night. However, you still need to avoid at least some of the hostile mobs
that persist during the day.
Introducing the HUD
Before we start, let’s take a look at the Heads-Up Display (HUD)—that collection of icons and status
bars at the bottom of the screen. Figure 3.1 shows the HUD as it appears in Survival mode with all
possible indicators displayed. (The Creative mode HUD only shows the Inventory bar.)
48 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
FIGURE 3.1 The HUD provides key status indications. Health is all important,
but low hunger also leads to low health, so keep a close eye on both.
1
2 3 5
4
6
1. Armor bar
2. Health bar
3. Experience bar
4. Oxygen bar
5. Hunger bar
6. Inventory quick access
Each section of the HUD provides a key nugget of information about the health or status of
your avatar:
Q Armor bar—The armor bar appears when you’ve equipped your avatar with any type of
armor and shows the current damage absorption level. Each armor icon represents an
8% reduction in the damage you’ll take, so a 10/10 suit of armor reduces the damage
you take by 80%, whereas a 1/10 suit absorbs only 8%. Armor becomes less effective the
more damage it absorbs, although the rate at which it deteriorates also depends on its
material—leather being the weakest and diamond the strongest.
Q Health bar—You have up to 20 points of health available, represented by the 10 hearts
shown. Each heart disappears in two ticks. Health and hunger have a complicated relationship. You can read more below starting at “Hunger Management.”
Q Experience bar—The experience bar increases the more you mine, smelt, cook, kill, and
fish. Your current level is shown in the middle of the bar. When it’s full, you move to
the next experience level. Experience isn’t generally important until you start enchanting
and giving additional powers to items such as swords (see Chapter 10, “Enchantments,
Anvils, and Brewing”). Unlike other role-playing games, experience in Minecraft is more
like a currency that you spend on enchantments, so it waxes and wanes. But all experience gained counts toward the final score shown on the screen when you die. Killing
a mob drops experience orbs that either fly directly toward you or float to the ground
waiting for you to collect them, and you can also gain experience by smelting certain
items in the furnace and carrying out other activities such as finding rare ores. Dying
causes a substantial drop in your current experience level.
Q Oxygen bar—The oxygen bar appears whenever you go underwater and it quickly starts
to drop. You can probably hold your own breath for longer! As soon as your oxygen
level hits zero, your health starts taking a two-point hit every second, but it resurfaces
for just an instant if you hold down the jump key until you’ve reached air once more.
Diving isn’t that big of a deal in Minecraft, at least not for completing the core game, 
Introducing the HUD 49
but you can use the ability to do interesting things like building an underwater base. An
example is shown in Figure 3.2, and I’ll show you how to build your own in Chapter 8,
“Creative Construction,” as well as sharing with you some other underwater breathing
techniques.
FIGURE 3.2 Underwater basesare impervious to mob attacks, even when built
from glass, but you’ll need to watch your oxygen bar carefully to ensure you
don’t run out of air while building this type of structure. By the way, the only
mob that spawns underwater is the friendly, curious squid. Can you make out
the one shown here? He’s now part of Elysia’s first private aquarium. Say hello
to “Ceph.”
 Hunger bar—You also have 20 points of hunger available, as well as a hidden value
called Saturation. Like health, each hunger bar icon holds two points and can reduce by
half an icon (that icon is, incidentally, a “shank,” or the lower part of a leg of meat) at
a time.
 Inventory quick access—These nine slots, also known as the Hotbar, represent items
you can select with the mouse scroll wheel or by pressing the 1–9 keys. Press E to access
your full inventory and to change the items in these slots. The white number next to
some shows that slot’s count of stacked identical items. A durability bar also appears
under each tool’s icon in green, gradually reducing as you use them until the tool
actually breaks and disappears from your inventory. You’ll have some warning of this
because the bar turns red when it’s close to zero. See “Improving Your Tools” later in the
chapter to learn more about the durability of different materials.
04
50 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
TIP
Showing Durability Stats in the HUD
Press F3+H (or fn+F3+H on OS X) todisplay the current and maximum durability value
of all the tools in your inventory. The value appears in a tool tip when you hover your
mouse over that item.
NOTE
HUD Changes When Mounted
The HUD changeswhen you ride a horse, showing the horse’s health in place of your
own. The experience bar also changes to the jump bar. You can learn more about
horses and other mountable mobs in Chapter 7, “Taming Mobs,” on page 125.
In multiplayer, your HUD also displays a chat window in the bottom-left corner. Press T to
expand the chat window.
Toggle the entire HUD display off and on by pressing F1. Press F3 with the HUD turned on
to view a much more detailed HUD debug screen (see Figure 3.3.)
NOTE
Hiding the HUD in the Xbox Editions
You cannot hide the HUDin Minecraft Pocket Edition but there is an option for doing
so on the Xbox edition. Press the Start key and open the Help & Options menu.
Scroll down to SettingsUser Interface and deselect Display HUD. Unfortunately
there isn’t a quicker way to do this at present.
The coordinates shown in the debug screen are based on the world’s origin where x=0 and
z=0. (y shows your current level above bedrock.) Take a note of the current values. If you
become lost before you have had the chance to build a bed and reset your spawn point, you
can always find your way back to your original spawn and, presumably, your first shelter, by
facing in a direction that will bring both x and z back to those noted values. If you do sleep
in a bed and reset your spawn, turn on the debug screen and write down the coordinates
shown before you head out.
0
Improving Your Tools 51
FIGURE 3.3 The Debug HUD provides a lot of cryptic information but can also
help you navigate home.
1. Your location in blocks east of your original spawn point. Blocks west are shown as a negative.
2. Your current vertical height in layers above bedrock.
3. Your location in blocks south of your original spawn point. Blocks north are shown as a negative.
4. The current biome type.
When you need to return, and I should warn you that this can take some experimentation
and a little practice, turn and take a few steps while noting the change in values of your
current coordinates. Shift those x and z values back toward the coordinates you originally
recorded. You’ll probably wander around a bit, but eventually you’ll get there.
Improving Your Tools
Wooden tools wear out fast, so it’s best to upgrade your kit as quickly as possible.
Each type of material has a different level of durability. Think of durability as the number of
useful actions the tool can perform before wearing out completely and disappearing from
the inventory. I’ve included the durability in parentheses after each material’s description:
 Gold (33)—Although this is the least durable material, a gold pickaxe can break blocks
out of most softer materials in the blink of an eye, and it happens to be the most
enchantable material, so you can imbue it with superpowers (see Chapter 10). But given
that gold is about 5 times as rare as iron and can be used to craft many other useful
items, I wouldn’t recommend using it for tools.
4
2
1
3
0
52 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
 Wood (60)—It’s easy to obtain, especially in an emergency aboveground, but think of
wood as just a means of getting to cobblestone because, unlike the latter, wooden tools
can’t mine the more valuable ores such as iron, gold, diamond, and redstone. You will
at least need a wooden pickaxe to mine stone because doing so with your bare hands
will just break the stone down into unusable dust, but after that, switch to stone.
 Stone (132)—With just a touch over twice the longevity of wood, stone makes a great
starting point for more serious mining and other activities. Stone tools are built from
cobblestone blocks, which in turn come from stone. That may seem a little confusing,
but it will seem natural enough after a while.
 Iron (251)—Iron will become your go-to material. It is found most commonly all the
way from bedrock, the lowest layer of the Minecraft world, up to about 20 levels below
sea level. Iron is used for building all kinds of tools, implements, and devices including
armor, buckets (for carrying water, lava, and milk), compasses, minecarts, and minecart
tracks. All these require at least iron ingots obtained by smelting the ore in a furnace,
with each block of ore producing one ingot. Ingots and many other items are found
scattered throughout the world in village chests, mine shafts, dungeons, and strongholds. You might also find them as drops from killed zombies and iron golems (if you
dare tackle them!).
 Diamond (1562)—It’s the strongest material of all, but also the most expensive given
that diamonds are relatively rare. (You will enjoy the moment you do find your first
diamond, but it’s found only in the first 16 layers above bedrock, the lowest layer in
the Minecraft world, and even then it’s about 25 times as scarce as iron.) A diamond
pickaxe is the only material that can successfully mine obsidian, a material required for
creating the portal to reach The Nether region. Given diamond ore is much scarcer than
iron but only 6 times as durable, you should use iron pickaxes as much as possible and
only switch to diamond when you need to mine obsidian to reach The Nether. You’re
better off saving any diamonds you find for weapons (a diamond sword does more
damage, and that combined with its increased durability will ensure it lasts much longer
than any other material), armor, and enchantment tables.
NOTE
Different Materials for Different Items
Durability applies to all tools, weapons, and armor, although there are differences
in the materials that can be used in each case. For example, you can craft leather
armor and make stone tools, but not vice versa.
04_9
Improving Your Tools 53
CAUTION
Don’t Let Tools Wear Down to Nothing!
Try not to let a tool becomeso worn it actually breaks down completely and disappears. Instead, place two of the same type of worn tools in the crafting grid to combine their remaining strength into another and give it a second shot at life, or busting
blocks.
The recipes for crafting tools from all materials are identical, save for the replacement of the
head of the implement with the material of choice.
Q To make a stone pick, you need two wooden sticks for the handle and three cobblestone blocks.
Q Replace in the same way for the axe and the sword.
Q You might also want to add a shovel to your collection, because it’s about four times
faster than using hands to harvest softer materials such as dirt, gravel, sand, clay, and
snow, and helps some of those blocks deliver resources rather than just breaking down.
As you craft more items, you need to find somewhere to store those you don’t need to use
right away. You should also store other resources and food you come across on your travels.
That comes next.
54 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
Chests: Safely Stash Your Stuff
Whenever you head away from your secure shelter, there is always a reasonably high risk of
death. Creepers, lava pits, long falls—they can all do you in. Respawning is only a moment
away, but the real danger here is that any items you’ve collected and carry in your character’s inventory drop at the location of your untimely death and may prove impossible to
retrieve in the 5 minutes you have to get back to them before they disappear forever.
Chests act as an insurance policy. Put everything you don’t need in a chest before you
embark on a mission, and those things will be there when you get back or after you
respawn.
The natural place to leave chests is in your shelter, but you can also leave them elsewhere,
perhaps as a staging point as you work away in a mine, or even outside. Mobs will leave
them alone, and the only real risk you face is leaving them out in the open on a multiplayer
server or getting blown up from behind by a creeper in singleplayer mode while you’re rummaging around inside.
Chests come in two sizes: single and double. A single chest can store 27 stacks of items.
Create a double chest by placing two single chests side by side. The double chest stores up
to 54 stacks of items. Given that a stack can be up to 64 items high, that’s an astonishing
potential total of 3,510 blocks in a crate that takes just 2×1 blocks of floor space. If you’ve
ever followed the Doctor Who TV series, consider chests the Tardis of storage!
Create a chest at your crafting table with eight blocks of wooden planks arranged around
the outside, leaving a space in the middle.
Place and then right-click the chest to open . You can then move items back and forth
between your inventory and the chest. In Figure 3.4, I’ve transferred all the items I don’t
need for the next expedition.
Before you head out, there are two other things you should know: how to avoid monsters
and how to deal with hunger. Read on.
Avoiding Monsters 55
FIGURE 3.4 Chests act as an insurance policy for your items so they aren’t lost
if you die. Use the inventory shortcuts you learned earlier to quickly move items
between your active inventory and the chest’s storage slots.
THE CONNECTED CHEST
Chests are undoubtedly useful; it’s difficult to survive without them. But you can’t
transport a chest’s contents with you. Need to shift your stash of diamonds? That
can make for a fairly fraught journey.
Enter the Ender chest, whichis like storage in the cloud. An Ender chest isn’t cheap
to make. You’ll need eight Obsidian blocks obtained by combining lava with water, or
through regular mining and caving, and one Eye of Ender, collected from a downed
endermen. So what’s so good about Ender chests? All of them access the same virtual chest, sharing all contents between them. So let’s say you’ve built multiple dwellings across your vast world, and you have some items—a few favorites—that you’d
like to be able to access anywhere you go. Place an Ender chest in each of your dwellings; any items that you place in any of the chests become available in all others. It’s
like quantum travel without all that entanglement business.
Avoiding Monsters
There’s a key difference between the Minecraft world on the first and second days. In a
word, mobs: hostile ones to be specific. Mobs only spawn in dark areas, and some only
during the night, so if you are outside during your first day and stay in well-lit areas, you’ll
be reasonably safe. By the second day, however, mobs have had a chance to build their
numbers and wander about. It’s not that likely you’ll encounter them on day 2, but it’s best
to be prepared.
56 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
There are 14 types of hostile mobs in the Overworld. These are the ones you might meet on
your second day outside:
 Zombies—Zombies burn up in sunlight but can still survive in shadows or rain, or when
wearing a helmet, and, of course, in dark caves all hours of the day or night. They are
relatively easy to defeat, and if any come after you, just head to a well-lit area and keep
your distance while they burn up in the sun.
 Skeletons—Skeletons also burn up in sunlight unless they are wearing a helmet, and they
can survive at any time in lower light conditions. They’re quite deadly with a bow and
arrow and best avoided until you have an iron sword and sufficient cover to avoid their
line of fire.
 Spiders—Spiders come in two variants: large or blue. You’ll probably only see the larger
spiders at this stage. They are passive during the day but become hostile in shadow and
can attack at any time if provoked. They’ll climb, they’ll jump, and they are pretty darn
fast. Fortunately, they’re also easy to kill with some swift sword attacks. The blue spiders are a smaller, poisonous variant called cave spiders. They live only in abandoned
mine shafts underground, but in substantial numbers. If you suffer from arachnophobia, I don’t have much good news for you, except that with a little time you’ll get used
to them and they won’t seem quite so nasty.
 Creepers—Creepers have a well-earned reputation as the Minecraft bad guys. They are
packed to their green gills with gunpowder, and they’ll start their very short 1.5-second
fuse as soon as they are within three blocks of you. Their explosion can cause a lot of
real damage to you, nearby structures, and the environment in general. If you hear a
creeper’s fuse—a soft hissing noise—but can’t see it, run like heck in the direction you’re
facing. Remember to sprint by double-tapping and holding your W key . With a little
luck, you’ll get three blocks away and the creeper’s fuse will reset. Creepers are usually
best dealt with using a ranged attack from a bow and arrow, but if you sprint at them
with an iron or diamond sword and take a swipe at just the right moment, you can send
them flying back out of their suicidal detonation range, causing the fuse to reset. Most
creepers despawn around noon, leaving the afternoon generally free of their particular
brand of terror.
 Slimes—Slimes appear in the swamp biome and in some places underground. They initially spawn as quite large Jello-like green blocks and are more than capable of causing
damage. Attacking eventually breaks them up into 2–4 new medium-sized slimes. These
can still attack but are relatively easily killed, only to spawn a further 2–4 tiny slimes
each! These last don’t cause any attack damage, but may still push you into peril if
you’re unlucky.
If you come across a lone spider, a zombie, or even a slime, now is as good a time as any to
get in some sword practice. Just point your crosshairs at thecreature and strike with the left
04_97
Avoiding Monsters 57
mouse button. Keep clicking as fast as you can, and you’ve got a very good chance of killing
the mob and picking up any items it drops before it lands too many blows. Try to avoid the
other mobs for now.
TIP
Switch to Peaceful Mode to Get a Break
Getting mobbed by mobs? Click Esc to open the Options window and changeyour
difficulty level to Peaceful. This despawns all hostile mobs and allows your health to
regenerate. But do try to switch the level back to Normal as soon as you can.
So how do you avoid mobs? Use these tips to survive:
Q Stay in the open as much as you can, avoiding heavily wooded areas if possible.
Q Most mobs have a 16-block detection radar. If they can also draw a line of sight to
your position, they will enter pursuit mode . (Spiders can always detect you, even through
other blocks.) At that point they’ll relentlessly plot and follow a path to your position,
tracking you through other blocks without requiring a line of sight. Pursuit mode stays
engaged much farther than 16 blocks.
Q Keep your sound turned up because you’ll also hear mobs within 16 blocks, although
creepers, befitting their name, are creepily quiet.
Q Avoid skirting along the edges of hilly terrain. Creepers can drop on you from above
with their fuse already ticking. Try to head directly up and down hills so you have a
good view of the terrain ahead.
Q Mobs are quite slow, so you can easily put some distance between them and yourself by
keeping up a steady pace and circling around to get back to your shelter. Sprint mode
will leave them far behind.
CAUTION
Sprinting Makes You Hungry
Sprint modeburns up hunger points, so try to use it only in emergencies.
58 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
Hunger Management
Hunger plays a permanent role in Minecraft, much as in real life. While it’s only possible
to starve to death on Hard difficulty, hunger does affect your character in other ways, so
it’s always important to ensure you have the equivalent of a couple of sandwiches packed
before heading deep into a mine or on a long trek.
Hunger is a combination of two values: the one shown in the HUD’s hunger bar, as well
as a hidden value called saturation. The latter provides a buffer to the hunger bar, decreasing first. In fact, your hunger bar doesn’t decrease at all until saturation reaches 0. At that
point, you see the hunger bar start to jitter, and after a short while it takes its first hit.
Saturation cannot exceed the value of the hunger bar, so with a full hunger bar of 20 points,
it’s possible to have up to 20 points of saturation. However, a hunger level of 6 points also
only provides a maximum of 6 points of saturation, and that makes you vulnerable.
You’ll find some key information about the hunger system here:
 On Easy and Normal Survival modes, there is no need to worry too much about hunger
because your character won’t drop dead from it. If you’re close to home and pottering
around in your farm or constructing some building extensions, you’re fairly safe, but
your health starts to drop. Eat something as soon as you can to fill your hunger bar,
and rebuild your health.
 Sprinting isn’t possible when the hunger bar drops below 6 hunger points, or 3 shanks,
as shown in the HUD.
 Keeping a relatively full stomach at 18 hunger points (9 shanks in the HUD) allows
health to regenerate at 1 point (half a heart) every 4 seconds.
 Health depletes if the hunger bar drops to 0, increasing the risk of dying from one of the
many imaginative ways Minecraft has on offer (see Figure 3.5).
 There are some limits to the amount health can drop according to the difficulty level.
On Easy, health cannot deplete from hunger further than 10 points, or half the full
quotient. On Normal, it drops to 1 point, which is an extreme level of vulnerability. On
Hard difficulty, there are no limits; don’t ignore the hunger bar, or death from starvation could be just moments away. See “Food on the Run” later in this chapter to help
avoid this.
04_97
Your Mission: Food, Resources, and Reconnaissance 59
FIGURE 3.5 The effects of extreme hunger on Normal difficulty: health depletes
to just one point, or half a heart.
Your Mission: Food, Resources, and
Reconnaissance
Your second day is the perfect opportunity to gather food and other resources and to take a
quick survey of the landscape surrounding your first shelter, in particular to find somewhere
suitable for your first outdoor abode. Keep an eye out for any of the following:
 Passive mobs—Chickens, pigs , and cows all provide a ready source of food, or at least
raw protein that can be cooked on the furnace and made more nutritious. Cows also
drop leather that you can use for your first armor, and when you have an iron bucket,
cows can be milked, giving you an instant cure for food poisoning. Chickens also lay
eggs, so gather any that you find.
 Natural harvest—The harvest includes cocoa pods, apples, cactus, sugar cane, carrots
and potatoes (found in villages), and seeds. Knock down tall grass to find seeds. When
you plant the seeds, they mature into wheat within 5–8 day/night cycles. From wheat,
it’s easy to bake bread, one of the simplest but most effective sources of food, especially
if there are no passive mobs nearby. See Chapter 6, “Crop Farming,” for more on agricultural techniques.
04
60 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
Q Construction resources—You can mine plenty of cobblestone quite safely by expanding
your original shelter, digging into the terrain. But some other resources will definitely
come in handy. Wood is always useful. If you see any sand, mine it so you can smelt
it into glass blocks to let light into your shelter, and provide a view. (There’s no point
moving from your first cave into the outdoor equivalent of another!) Also keep an eye
out for coal. You can often see it in veins on the surface of the walls of small caves or
on the sides of cliffs. If you can safely get to it, make like a miner and dig it out. Use the
coal to make torches and to smelt other ores.
FIGURE 3.6 Knock down grass to gather seeds to plant wheat, an easy crop to
farm and turn into bread—a handy food if you’re stuck with no other edible options.
TIP
Making Use of Bones
The morning sunburns up skeletons, leaving behind bones that you can craft into
bone meal. Bone meal acts as a fertilizer, helping your crops grow faster. You can also
use bone to tame wolves, providing you with an extra level of protection. Chapter 7,
“Taming Mobs,” has a lot more information on breeding and taming Minecraft’s many
friendly creatures.
Start early, heading out with a stone sword at the ready, just in case. If you are low on wood,
swing an axe at a few nearby trees.
Your Mission: Food, Resources, and Reconnaissance 61
Move carefully so you don’t lose your bearings. The sun rises in the east and sets in the
west, and the clouds always travel from east to west, so you can always at least get your
bearings. Following a compass cardinal point (north, south, east, or west) using the sun
and clouds as a reference can lead you away and reasonably accurately back home again.
TIP
Finding Your Way
It’s easy to become lost in Minecraft. Run helter-skelter from your base, chase a herd
of livestock, discover a natural cave system, or take a shot across the sea like that
famed Norseman, Leif Eriksson. It’s all part of the Minecraft charm. But don’t become
Columbus in the process.
A few quick tips:
Q When you are able, craft a compass. Ittakes some redstone and iron, and both
are relatively easy to obtain with some assiduous mining. The only problem with a
compass is that it always points to your original world spawn point. Think of that
point as the magnetic north pole—it’s not a GPS. Sleeping in a bed resets your
spawn point but not your compass, so this method falls out of date as soon as
you move to new dwellings and update your spawn point.
Q A compass is actually more useful when crafted into a map, see Chapter 10,
“Enchanting, Anvils, and Brewing” page 195.
Q Don’t forget that you can always use the built-in GPS available through the debug
screen (mentioned under the “Introducing theHUD” section earlier in this chapter).
Food on the Run
If you are getting dangerously hungry, head to the nearest equivalent of a fast food outlet—
a passive mob—sword at the ready. Your best bet is to look for cows and pigs because they
each can drop up to three pieces of raw meat, with each piece restoring 3 hunger units and
1.8 in saturation. They’re an excellent target of opportunity. You can also eat raw chicken,
although with a 30% chance of developing food poisoning, or you can try rotten meat harvested from zombies, which is guaranteed to give you a taste of the stomach aches. But you
can also cure any type of food poisoning by drinking milk obtained with a bucket clicked on
a cow, and you can eat any amount of poisoned meat, gaining the restorative benefits, and
curing the whole lot with one serving of milk. So keep that rotten flesh the zombies drop
around! And the bucket o’ milk.
62 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
That said, unless you are desperate, it is actually much better to take the time to cook all
your meat first. In fact, the secondary processing of foods makes them all healthier, restoring more hunger and saturation points. It’s therefore quite handy to always carry a furnace
in your inventory, along with fuel. When you’ve finished cooking, break the furnace down
with a pickaxe, and it floats back into your inventory. If you don’t mind seeming like a
crazed pyromaniac, you can also both kill and cook pigs, chickens, and cows in one blazing
swoop by setting the ground beneath them on fire with a flint and steel (right-click on the
ground, not the animal), or a little more chaotically by pouring lava from a bucket. Just take
caution that you don’t do this anywhere it could pose a risk, such as near that fantastic
wood cabin you just spent the last three weeks building; there’s no Undo key in Minecraft.
NOTE
Fishing in the Sea of Plenty
Mobs such as chicken, cows, and pigs spawn quite rarely compared tohostile mobs,
so consider them a nonrenewable resource if you kill them in the wild. You’re better
off breeding them in a farm so they can’t wander off and can be readily replaced.
Fish, on the other hand, are unlimited in quantity and very plentiful. You can even fish
in waterfalls! By the way, yourhunger bar never decreases when travelling by boat,
making it the perfect opportunity to get in a spot of fishing. And you can never get
food poisoning from raw fish. Sushi anyone? See Chapter 7 for more information.
TIP
Let Them Eat Cake
What’s the quickest way to fill your hunger bar? Eat cake. Unlike another well-known
game, Minecraft’s cake isnot a lie. Cake has a quite a complicated recipe, but each
full cake provides up to 6 slices, each worth 1.5 hunger points, or 9 in total, and it’s
less resource intensive than creating golden apples. Minecraft rewards calories, so
eat as much as you like without penalty, quickly building back your full hunger bar but,
as in the real world, the nutrients are lacking, so cake doesn’t provide any saturation
benefit. Make sure you eat some more nutritional foods such as protein as your hunger bar starts to top out to ensure you also get that extra boost. If only they added
pizza!
Finally, if you simply cannot find mobs, your hunger bar has dropped to 0, and your health
has plummeted to half a point, consider at least planting a wheat field and waiting it out in
your shelter for three blocks of wheat to grow so you can harvest them and bake bread.

Your Mission: Food, Resources, and Reconnaissance 63
There’s one final alternative, and this is a pretty neat trick. Assuming you have reset your
spawn point to a bed or are still near origin, head to your shelter, place everything you carry
in a chest, and then head outside and either jump off a cliff, drown in a lake, or wait for
a mob to kill you. You respawn back in your shelter with full health, a full hunger bar, and
all your possessions waiting for you. Get dressed, fully equipped, and head out there to try
again.
Finding a Building Site
As you scout around, keep in mind that you are also looking for a new building site. This
doesn’t have to be fancy or even particularly large. A 6×5 space manages just fine, and even
6×4 can squeeze in the basics. You can also level ground and break down a few trees to
clear space. I did this in Figure 3.7. The site is located just up the hill from the first dugout,
overlooking the same lake and river system.
FIGURE 3.7 A nice, flat, elevated building site after clearing some trees and filling some holes in the ground with dirt.
I usually prefer space that’s a little elevated because it provides a better view of the surroundings, but it’s perfectly possible to create a protected space just about anywhere. You
may even decide to go a little hybrid, building a house that’s both tunneled into a hill and
extending outside.
64 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
TIP
Light Those Caves
Check for any cavesor tunnels close to your site’s location. If they aren’t too big, light
them up with torches to prevent mobs spawning inside and wandering out during the
day, or just block their entrance for now.
So what can we build on this site? Let me show you a basic structure. It takes 34 cobblestone blocks dug out of the first shelter and 12 wood blocks for the roof obtained by cutting down the 3 trees that were occupying the site .
FIGURE 3.8 The layout for a small cobblestone cabin using a total of 46 blocks,
roof not shown. The sharp-eyed will notice it can be reduced in width one space
further, but for the sake of four blocks, that would feel a little claustrophobic.
You can build the roof from almost any handy material, including dirt, cobblestone, and
wood. Avoid blocks that fall down, such as gravel and sand. A two-block high wall keeps
out all mobs except for spiders, because they can climb walls. An overhang on the wall
keeps spiders out because they can’t climb upside-down, but it’s easier to just add a roof,
especially if there are trees nearby the spiders can climb up and use as an arachnid’s springboard to jump straight into your dwelling. (Yes, it’s happened to me. Sent shivers up my
spine.) Figure 3.9 shows the finished hut with a few torches on the outside to keep things
well lit.

Your Mission: Food, Resources, and Reconnaissance 65
FIGURE 3.9 The finished hut—basic but serviceable. And it’s spider proof.
Although there is a large gap above the door, in Minecraft’s geometry the door
fills theentire space. Spiders are also two blocks wide, so they can’t fit through
a one-block-wide gap. You could actually leave the door wide open, and spiders
will just gather outside and make horrible noises, but don’t do that because it’s
an invitation for other mobs to enter.
TIP
No Housing Codes in Minecraft
The roof in Figure 3.9 rests right on the lip of the inner wall. You can’tdirectly build a
roof like this from scratch. First place a block on top of the wall, and then attach the
inner block for the roof. Remove the first block, and the inner block floats. Attach new
blocks to that to build out the roof structure. It won’t pass a building inspection, but it
certainly works in Minecraft.
Building a wall even two blocks high can take a little bit of fancy footwork. Some basic
techniques help:
 Place your walls one layer at time. Put down the first layer, and then jump on top to
place the second.
 If you fall off, place a temporary block on the inside of your structure against the wall,
and use this to climb back up. You can remove it when you’re finished.
 Use pillar jumping if you need to go higher. While looking directly down, press the
04_
66 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
spacebar to jump and then right-click to place a block underneath you. You land on
that block instead of the one below. Repeat as often as necessary. Dig the blocks out
from directly underneath you to go back down.
Q Hold down the Shift key as you work around the top of tall walls so you don’t fall off.
You can even use this technique to place blocks on the side of your current layer that are
normally beyond sight.
See Chapter 8 for more building techniques and ideas.
A Resourceful Guide to the Creative Mode
Inventory
Minecraft’s resources fall into several primary categories. Some of them are a natural early
focus as you improve your position from those gathered for first-night survival; others
become more important as you get further through the game, gear up for your exploration
of The Nether and The End regions, and become more creative with all that Minecraft has
to offer. Here’s a quick summary of the different categories. You can view all possible tools
and resources by opening your inventory in Creative mode, as shown in Figure 3.10. The
categories that follow correspond to the tabs running across the upper and lower sections
of the Creative mode inventory .
FIGURE 3.10 Creative mode inventory provides access to the full set of
resources and tools.
A Resourceful Guide to the Creative Mode Inventory 67
TIP
Turn On Cheats
Turn on Cheatswhen you start a new world to quickly jump between different
gameplay modes. Type /gamemmode creative and /gamemode survival to move
between the main types.
 Building Blocks—Building blocks are used, as you might expect, for construction, including housing and almost anything else. Build a bridge for your redstone rail. Construct a
dam. Elevate a farm above a level that won’t get trampled by mobs, or put up a fence.
Build a skyscraper or reconstruct a monument. Minecraft provides a large number of primary blocks—such as cobblestone, gravel, wood, and dirt—that can be harvested directly,
but things definitely become more interesting once you start creating secondary types of
blocks from primary materials. You can store many items more efficiently (for example, by
converting nine gold ingots into a single gold block), and climb more efficiently by crafting stairs instead of jumping up and down blocks on well-travelled routes. Building blocks
are, without being too punny, the building blocks of creativity.
 Decoration Blocks—Decoration blocks are something of a catchall category. Generally,
they are things you can use to make your constructions more interesting. Some of those
are just visual, such as carpet, whereas others such as crafting tables, chests, and the
bed that keeps you safe at night provide vital functions.
 Redstone—Redstone is an almost magical resource. You can use it to build powered
circuits, quite complex ones, and then activate pistons to automatically harvest a farm
plot, set up traps, open and close doors, and a huge amount more. The limits are set
only by your imagination. Redstone is also used to craft powered rail tracks and a range
of other useful items such as a compass and clock. See Chapter 9, “Redstone, Rails,
and More,” for more information.
 Transportation—Transportation is a small category, but one that’s a lot of fun and very
useful. It includes powered and unpowered rails, minecarts, a saddle, a boat, and anything else related to moving yourself and other items around. There are enough options
there to enable you to build everything from massive transportation systems to incredible
roller coasters.
 Miscellaneous—Miscellaneous contains a range of useful and obscure items. You’ll find
the buckets quite handy for setting up new water and lava sources, and you can use the
eggs to spawn most of the mobs , populating a farm and more.
 Foodstuffs—Foodstuffs contains the full range of edibles, including the enchanted form
of the golden apple, the rarest edible in the game. Take a few of these with you the next
04_978
68 CHAPTER 3: Gathering Resources
time you think you’ll be in a tight spot, and you may just be able to make it through that
moaning zombie horde.
 Tools—Tools can be wielded as weapons, but not very effectively. They are, however,
great at digging, chopping, hoeing, and setting Nether Portals on fire with the flint and
steel. You’ll also find shears for stripping the wool from sheep, a fishing rod, and a few
enchanted books that can add special powers to your tools.
 Combat—Combat provides your weapons and armor, as well as the remaining enchanted
books that relate to combat items.
 Brewing—The Brewing tab contains all possible potions and a number of the rarer ingredients required that don’t fit into other categories. Potions are incredibly handy. Caught outside at night? The Potion of Night Vision triples the brightness to almost daylight conditions.
You can learn more about brewing in Chapter 10.
 Materials—Materials is the final catchall category, along with the miscellaneous and decoration blocks. It differs because it is composed of secondary items that are derived from
another action. For example, killing a chicken can drop feathers, and you’ll need those for
the fletching on arrows unless you gather them from skeletons. Grow wheat to get bushels
that can be used to tame horses, donkeys, and mules.
There are two other tabs on the Creative inventory. In the upper-right corner is a compass
icon. This is the search bar. Just click on it and type in the item’s name.
In the lower-right corner is a chest. This is your Survival mode inventory containing any items
you were carrying when you switched to Creative mode. (This is empty if you started your world
in Creative mode.) You can shift items between the Creative mode inventory and your Survival
inventory . Any items you drag down to the quick access bar are common across both inventories. Re -move items from your Survival inventory by dragging them down to the square filled
with an X.
The Bottom Line
Congratulations! You’ve now learned everything you need to know to understand how your
character is doing, improve your tools for better longevity, hopefully not get lost on your travels, and create your first mob-proof outdoor shelter.
These are the keys to Minecraft. Just remember to head back to your chest often to store the
valuables you’ve gathered, or build other chests further afield.
You might also want to consider building a pillar and platform on top of your new shelter.
It can help you survey your terrain and acts as an easy-to-see landmark when you’re out and
about. Put some torches on top because mobs can spawn on any platform, no matter how
small, and you don’t want to poke your head up through the platform only to discover a
creeper on a short fuse.
The next chapter is all downhill—deep into your first mine.
04_9
INDEX
NUMBERS
2x1 ladder descent, mining and, 74
A
A key, 25
activator rails, 189
ads (pop-up), downloading resource packs, 258
Adventure mode, 17
airlocks, building, 36
Allow Cheats setting (Create New World
screen), 14
anchor blocks, 166
AND gates, 182-183
animals, 125
breeding, 126-130
cats, 127
chickens, 127
crafting arrows, 97
fences, 126
cooking, 61
cows, 127
donkeys, 127, 130-133
farms, 125-128
fences, 126
fi sh, 62
fi shing, 134
food poisoning, 61
herding, 128
horses, 127
armor and, 132
jumping with, 132
leading, 129
riding, 130-132
taming, 130-132
hostile mobs and safety, 128
jumping with, 132
leading, 127-129
leather, obtaining, 99
mooshrooms, 127
mules, 127, 130-133
ocelots, 127
pack animals, 133
pigs, 127, 134
raw, eating, 61
resources, animals as, 59, 62
riding, 130-134
sheep and wool, 42-43, 127, 130
squid, 135
taming, 127, 130-132
wolves, 127
anvils
combining two items with, 209
crafting, 207
enchantments, 209
placement of, 208
renaming items, 209
repairing items, 209
274 Aqua Affinity enchantment
Aqua Affi nity enchantment, 206
architectural plans, fi nding, 140
armor, 94
armor bar (HUD), 48
Armor slots (inventory), 27
crafting
color, 100
leather, 99
recipes, 99-100
requirements, 98-99
critical hits, 94
damage absorption, 99
enchantments, 205-206
End survival checklist, The, 243
horses and, 132
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
arrows and bows
arrow slits, building, 157
crafting, 96
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting, 98
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
skeletons, 88, 96
target practice, 98
attacking. See combat
automated farms, 113
crop selection, 116
harvesting, 115
piston harvesters, 117-118
sticky piston harvesters, 119
sugar cane, 122
water harvesters, 119-122
automatic doors, building, 173-176
awkward potion, 212-213
axes, crafting, 32
B
Bane of Arthropods enchantment, 204
barbeques, building, 146
barricades, building in The Nether, 239
bases
mining bases, setting up, 81
underwater bases, mob attacks, 49
basins, 222
BeastsMC multiplayer server, 269
beds
building, 41-43, 142
End, The, 242-243
Nether, The, 242
spider string, 42
taking with you, 44
villages and, 219
wool, 42-43
bedside tables, building, 142
biomes
changing, 26
choosing, 16
Far Lands or Bust, 16
islands, fi rst-night survival, 26
Large Biomes option, 217
oceans, fi rst-night survival, 26
pocket edition, 16
resetting, 26
trees
fi rst-night survival, 25
lumberjacking, 26
Xbox 360 Edition, 16
blacksmiths, 220
Blast Protection enchantment, 206
bowls, crafting 275
blaze rods
fi nding, 234
Nether, The, 234, 239
potions, brewing, 210
blazes in The Nether, 241
blaze spawners, 239
blocking
areas off (mining), 73
attacks, 95
blocks
anchor blocks, 166
building blocks, 67
cobblestone, 60
furnace, crafting, 38-39
huts, building, 64
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
powered blocks, 166
Command Block, 267
decoration blocks, 67
diamonds, 52
fl oating blocks, 140
glowstones
glowstone dust potion, 214
Nether, The, 238
underwater, building, 148-150
gold (material type), 51
gravel
arrows, crafting, 97
mining, 97
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
Nether, The
barricades, building, 239
Netherbrick, 238-239
Nether quartz, 238
Netherrack, 146, 237
survival checklist, 234
note blocks, 173
obsidian
enchantment tables, 197-199
End survival checklist, The, 243
mining, 70, 197-199
Nether Portals, building, 236
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
powered blocks, 166-167
redstone blocks, 67, 162
scale of, 138
signs, placement of, 141
snow blocks, The Nether survival checklist,
235
soft blocks, building underwater, 148,
152
wood blocks, 52
gathering, fi rst-night survival, 25-26
mining and, 70
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
planks, crafting, 29
wood buttons, 162, 166, 173
boats, building, 134
bobbers (fi shing), 134
bones
as resources, 60
farming, 110
Bonus Chest setting (Create New World
screen), 15
books
crafting, 200
enchantment tables, 200
storing enchantments, 202
bookshelves
building, 145
casting enchantments, 202
bottles, crafting, 212
bowls, crafting, 124
276 bows and arrows
bows and arrows
arrow slits, building, 157
crafting, 96
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting, 98
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
skeletons, 88, 96
target practice, 98
branch mines, 79-80
bread, 62
breaking your fall, 75-76
breeding animals, 126-130
brewing. See also building; crafting;
growing
bottles, crafting, 212
brewing stands, building, 212
Creative mode inventory, 68
potions
blaze rods, 210
Nether wart, 209-212
soul sand, 209-211
testing potions, 210
buckets and mining, 70
building, 137-138. See also brewing;
crafting; growing
airlocks, 36
arrow slits, 157
automatic doors, 173-176
barbeques, building, 146
barricades, building in The Nether, 239
beds, 41-43, 142
bedside tables, 142
boats, 134
bookshelves, 145
brewing stands, 212
building blocks, 67
chairs, 141
clocks (wall), 144
crafting tables, 29-30, 35
decoration blocks, 67
dining tables, 142
enchantment tables, 197-201
fi replaces, 146
fl oors (raised/lowered), 145
fountains, 144
frames (item), 144
griefi ng, 140
huts, 64-65
item frames, 144
lighting, 64
location, determining, 139, 149
maps (wall), 144
multiplayer rules, 140
Nether Portals, 236
netting, 145
overhangs and spiders, 64
paintings, 144
perimeters
arrow slits, 157
ditches, 153-154
lighting, 155
mobs, 155-157
towers, 155
walls, 157
pits, 155-157
plans, fi nding, 140
planter boxes, 143
ponds, 144
pools, 144
pressure plates, 156
redstone, 67, 162
resource packs, 138
scale of, 138
security
arrow slits, 157
ditches, 153-154
carts (mine) 277
lighting, 155
mobs, 155-157
perimeters, 153-157
pits, 155-157
pressure plates, 156
towers, 155
walls, 157
shelter, 33-34
doors, 36-37
emergency shelters, 38
heat sources, 37-38
light sources, 37-41
signs, placement of, 141
sites
fi nding, 63
housing codes, 65
walls, 65
sliding doors, 177-179
tables
bedside tables, 142
crafting tables, 29-30, 35
enchantment tables, 197-201
dining tables, 142
tennis courts, 145
tool enchantments, 206-207
tracks
halfway stations, 192
mobs, protecting tracks from, 192
powered rails, 190
T-junctions, 191
zig zags, 190
trees (fantasy), growing, 144
underwater, 139, 147, 151
Creative mode, 147
doors, 150
enchantments, 153
fl oating blocks, 140
fl ooding, 152
island spawn points, 149
ladders, 150
lighting, 148-150
location, 149
oxygen, 150
required equipment, 148-149
security, 153
signs, 150
soft blocks, 148, 152
Survival mode, 148
vandalism, 140
villages, building next to, 139
wall clocks, 144
wall maps, 144
walls, 86, 157
water, building on, 139
butchers, 220
buttons, 162. See also pressure plates
automatic doors, 173
powered blocks, 166
buying Minecraft, 10-11
C
cake, 62
carrots, 105
carts (mine), 185-186
destroying and reusing, 188
hopper minecarts, 187
powered minecarts, 187-188
rails, building, 159
activated rails, 189
detector rails, 164, 189
halfway stations, 192
mobs, protecting tracks from, 192
normal rails, 188
powered rails, 189-190
T-junctions, 191
zig zags, 190
storage minecarts, 187
278 carts (mine)
TNT minecarts, 187-189
trains, minecarts as, 188
underground rails, 188
cats, 127
caves, 222
cave spiders, 88-89
doors, importance of, 85
lighting, 64
mining
creating caves, 69
existing caves, 69
shelter, building, 34
chairs, building, 141
character skins, 251
changing, 252, 255
skin editor websites
Minecraftskins, 253
Novaskin, 254
Skincraft, 253
superhero skins, 262
Steve, 252
charcoal
crafting, 37
furnaces, fueling, 40
chat window (HUD), 50
cheats, 15
Allow Cheats setting (Create New World
screen), 14
seeding, 19
spawning, 42
turning on, 67
chests
Bonus Chests setting (Create New World
screen), 15
Chest icon (Creative mode inventory), 68
crafting, 54-55
Ender chests, 55, 232, 235
minecarts with chests (storage minecarts),
187
mining and, 81
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
opening, 54
sizes of, 54
trapped chests, 163
chickens, 127
arrows, crafting, 97
fences, 126
children in villages, 218, 221
chopping down trees, 26
circuits
AND gates, 182-183
NOR gates, 182
NOT gates (inverters), 180
OR gates, 181
repeater loops, 184
cliffs
Nether, The, 238
shelter, building, 34
clocks, crafting, 144, 229
closing doors, 36
clothing, dyeing wool, 130
coal
charcoal, crafting, 37
furnaces, fueling, 40
cobblestone, 60
furnace, crafting, 38-39
huts, building, 64
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
powered blocks, 166
cobwebs as netting, 145
cocoa beans, 104-105
color
armor, crafting, 100
dyeing and, 130
crafting 279
combat. See also defenses
armor
crafting, 98-100
critical hits, 94
damage absorption, 99
arrows and bows
arrow slits, 157
crafting, 96
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting, 98
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
skeletons, 88, 96
target practice, 98
combat category (Creative mode
inventory), 68
critical hits, 94
creepers, 89-90, 102
critical hits, 94
enchantments, 204-205
Ender Dragon, 246-249
Endermen, 91
hostile mobs, 84
iron golems, 93-94
Peaceful mode, resting via, 57
skeletons, 87-89
slimes, 90-91
snow golems, 92-93
spiders, 86-87
cave spiders, 88-89
spider jockeys, 89
sprinting and, 95
swords
blocking attacks, 95
crafting, 32, 95
damage, dealing, 95
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting with, 56
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
zombies, 84-85
zombie pigmen, 91-92
combining items and enchantments with an
anvil, 209
Command Block, 267
compare mode (comparators), 170
compasses
Compass icon (Creative mode inventory),
68
crafting, 61, 227
construction. See building
controls
A key, 25
directional keys, 25
D key, 25
E key, 27
Esc key, 25
FN key (Mac OSX), 20
left-handed options, 21
list of controls, 19-20
Q key, 29
Shift key
pausing on ladders, 74
sneaking around hazards, 81
S key, 25
W key, 25, 56
cooking, 61
cows, 127
crafting. See also brewing; building;
growing
anvils, 207
armor
color, 100
leather, 99
recipes, 99-100
requirements, 98-99
arrows and bows, 96
axes, 32
280 crafting
books, 200
bottles, 212
bowls, 124
bows and arrows, 96
chests, 54-55
clocks, 229
compasses, 61, 227
Crafting grid (inventory), 27
crafting tables, 29-30, 35
furnaces, 38-39
heat sources, 37-38
light sources, 37-41
Minecraft: Xbox 360 edition, 31
multicrafting, 36
pickaxes, 32
planks, 29
shortcuts, 35
shovels, 33
swords, 32, 95
tools
durability, 53
handles, 30-31
torches, 39-41
wool, 42, 43
Create New World screen
Allow Cheats setting, 14
Bonus Chest setting, 15
Generate Structures setting, 14
World Type setting, 14
Creative mode, 17
compass icon, 68
inventory, 66
brewing, 68
building blocks, 67
Chest icon, 68
combat, 68
decoration blocks, 67
foodstuffs, 67
materials, 68
miscellaneous, 67
moving items to Survival mode inventory, 68
redstone, 67
tools, 68
transportation, 67
search bar, 68
underwater, building, 147
creepers, 56
defending against, 102
fi ghting, 89-90
gunpowder and, 90
swimming and, 90
critical hits (combat), 94
crop farming, 103
automated farms, 113
crop selection, 116
harvesting, 115
piston harvesters, 117-118
sticky piston harvesters, 119
sugar cane, 122
water harvesters, 119-122
bones and, 110
carrots, 105
choosing crops, 103-106
cocoa beans, 104-105
establishing farms
block to crop ratios, 107
bone meal, 110
diffi cult terrain, 106
fences, 109, 112
growth cycles, 110
harvesting, 112
lighting, 110
location, 106-107
planting, 108
raised beds, 111-112
debug screen (HUD) 281
saving crops, 111
water, 107-108, 112
fences, 104, 109, 112
growth cycles, 110
harvesting, 110-112, 115
lighting and, 104, 110
melons, 105
Minecraft updates and, 107
piston farms, 113
crop selection, 116
harvesting, 115
piston harvesters, 117-118
sticky piston harvesters, 119
sugar cane, 122
water harvesters, 119-122
potatos, 105
pumpkins, 105
raised beds, 104, 111-112
saving crops, 111
seeds, 103, 108
self-sufi ciency, 104
sneaking and, 111
soil, 104
sugar cane, 104-106
automated farms, 122
piston farms, 122
tending farms, 104
underground farms, 104, 123
wheat, 103, 106, 110-112
crosshairs (bows and arrows), targeting
with, 98
current (vertical), 178-180
customizing Minecraft
Minecraft launchers, 11
mods, 251
defi ning, 258
fi nding, 265
Forge mods, 259-260
installing, 259-260
jar fi les, 261
Legendary Beasts website, 263
More Explosives website, 262
More Mobs website, 264
multiple mods, using, 258
permanent effects of, 259
REI’s MiniMap website, 263
removing, 260
restoring games, 259
superheroes website, 262
Too Many Items website, 261
zip fi les, 261
resource packs, 251, 255
Dokucraft, 256-257
downloading and pop-ups, 258
Faithful 32, 257
functionality, 256
installing, 256-257
Ovo2s Rustif, 257
pixels per texture, 257
skins, 251
changing, 255
Minecraftskins website, 253
Novaskin website, 254
Skincraft website, 253
Steve, 252
superheroes, 262
D
D key, 25
damage
absorbing, 99
dealing, swords, 95
dandelions, dyeing with, 130
Dante’s infl uence on Minecraft, 242
debug screen (HUD), 50-51
282 decoration blocks
decoration blocks, 67
defenses. See also combat
arrow slits, 157
barricades, 239
caves, 85
creeper attacks, 102
detection systems
detector rails, 163-164, 189
pressure plates, 156
tripwires, 163
ditches, 153-154
doors, importance of, 85
emergency shelters, 38
enchantments, 205-206
Ender Dragon, defeating, 246-249
perimeters, 153-157
pits, 155-157
pressure plates, 156
spiders, 86
towers, 155
trapdoors, 172
tunnels, 85
walls, 86, 157
defensive mobs
iron golems, 93-94
snow golems, 92-93
demo version
time span, 7
troubleshooting, 8
desert temples, 223-224
destroying and reusing carts, 188
detection systems
detector rails, 163-164, 189
pressure plates, 156
tripwires, 163
diamonds, 52
diffi culty levels, 57
dining tables, building, 142
directional keys, 25
discarding inventory items, 29
ditches, building, 153-155
Dokucraft resource pack, 256-257
donkeys, 127
HUD changes while riding, 50
jumping with, 132
packing, 133
riding, 130-132
taming, 130-132
doors
airlocks, building, 36
as output devices, 172
automatic doors, building, 173-176
caves, 85
installing, 37
iron doors, 36, 235
opening/closing, 36
sliding doors, building, 177-179
trapdoors, 172
tunnels, 85
underwater, building, 150
down, digging straight down, 73
downloading
Minecraft, 10-11
resource packs and pop-ups, 258
dungeons, 225-226
durability
diamond, 52
gold, 51
HUD, viewing stats in, 50
iron, 52
stone, 52
End, The 283
tools
crafting, 53
improving, 51-52
wearing down, 53
wood, 52
dyeing
color, choosing, 130
dandelions and, 130
Lapis Lazuli ore and, 130
squid ink and, 135
wool, 130
E
E key, 27
earning XP, 203-204
Easy mode and hunger, 58
Easy option (Survival mode), 18
Effi ciency enchantment, 207
emeralds, farming, 222
emergency shelters, 38
enchantments, 195
anvils, crafting enchantments and,
207-209
Aqua Affi nity enchantment, 206
armor, 205-206
Bane of Arthropods enchantment, 204
benefi ts of, 195
Blast Protection enchantment, 206
books, 200-202
bookshelves, 202
casting, 200-202
combining, 209
Effi ciency enchantment, 207
enchantment tables
books, 200
casting enchantments, 200-201
obsidian, 197-199
Feather Falling enchantment, 206
Fire Aspect enchantment, 205
Fire Protection enchantment, 206
Flame enchantment, 205
Fortune enchantment, 207
Infi nity enchantment, 205
Knockback enchantment, 204
Looting enchantment, 205
methods of gaining, 196
Power enchantment, 205
Projectile Protection enchantment, 206
Protection enchantments, 205-206
Punch enchantment, 205
repairing enchanted items, 201
Respiration enchantment, 153, 206
Sharpness enchantment, 204
Silk Touch enchantment, 207
Smite enchantment, 204
storing, 202
Thorns enchantment, 206
tools, 206-207
Unbreaking enchantment, 207
water affi nity, building underwater, 153
weapons, 204-205
End, The, 24, 231
Dante’s infl uence on, 242
Ender chests, 55, 232, 235
Ender Dragon, 233, 245
defeating, 246- 249
egg, collecting, 250
Endermen, 91, 246, 249
Ender pearls, 91, 234
End Poem, 250
End Portals, 245
Eyes of Ender, 233-234, 243-245
navigating, 233
silverfi sh spawners, 245
284 End, The
sleeping in, 242-243
strongholds, fi nding, 244-245
survival checklist, 243
trading versus fi ghting, 234
enemies
avoiding, 57
creepers, 56
defending against, 102
fi ghting, 89-90
gunpowder and, 90
swimming and, 90
Endermen, 91, 246, 249
iron golems, 93-94
Legendary Beasts mod website, 263
More Mobs mod website, 264
Peaceful mode, 57
pursuit mode, 57
skeletons, 56
arrows and, 88, 96
as resources, 60
bones, farming benefi ts, 110
fi ghting, 87-88
potions, 215
spider jockeys, 89
wither skeletons, 241
slimes, 56, 90-91
snow golems, 92-93
spawners
blaze spawners, 239
disabling, 223
silverfi sh spawners, 245
spiders, 56
cave spiders, 88-89
defending against, 86
ditches, crossing, 153
eyes as food, 86
fermented spider eye potions, 214
fi ghting, 86-87
overhangs and, 64
spider jockeys, 89
string, 42, 86
uses for, 86
walls as defense, 86
zombies, 56
crafting arrows, 97
fi ghting, 84-85
reinforcements, 85
rotten meat, 85
zombie pigmen, 91-92
equipment
End survival checklist, The, 243
Nether survival checklist, The, 234-235
Esc key, 25
experience bar (HUD), 48
experience points (XP)
earning, 203-204
enchantments, 195, 200
managing, 203-204
exploding minecarts, 187-189
explosives
exploding minecarts, 187-189
More Explosives mod website, 262
Eyes of Ender, 91, 233-234, 243-245
F
Faithful 32 resource pack, 257
falling while mining, 73, 75-76
fantasy trees, growing, 144
Far Lands or Bust, 16
farmers, 220
farming, 103
animals
breeding, 126-130
cats, 127
fences 285
chickens, 126-127
cows, 127
donkeys, 127, 130-133
fences, 126
fi sh, 62
herding, 128
horses, 127-132
jumping with, 132
leading, 127-129
mobs and safety, 128
mooshrooms, 127
mules, 127, 130-133
ocelots, 127
pack animals, 133
pigs, 127, 134
riding, 130-134
sheep and wool, 42-43, 127, 130
taming, 127, 130-132
wolves, 127
automated farms, 113
crop selection, 116
harvesting, 115
piston harvesters, 117-118
sticky piston harvesters, 119
sugar cane, 122
water harvesters, 119-122
bones and, 110
carrots, 105
choosing crops, 103-106
cocoa beans, 104-105
cooking, 61
establishing farms
animals, 125-128
block to crop ratios, 107
bone meal, 110
diffi cult terrain, 106
fences, 109, 112
growth cycles, 110
harvesting, 112
lighting, 110
location, 106-107
planting, 108
raised beds, 111-112
saving crops, 111
water, 107-108, 112
fences, 104, 109, 112, 126
growth cycles, 110
harvesting, 110-112, 115
leather, obtaining, 99
lighting and, 104, 110
melons, 105
Minecraft updates and, 107
piston farms, 113
crop selection, 116
harvesting, 115
piston harvesters, 117-118
sticky piston harvesters, 119
sugar cane, 122
water harvesters, 119-122
potatos, 105
pumpkins, 105
raised beds, 104, 111-112
saving crops, 111
seeds, 103, 108
self-suffi ciency, 104
sneaking and, 111
soil, 104
sugar cane, 104-106, 122
tending farms, 104
underground farms, 104, 123
wheat, 103, 106, 110-112
Feather Falling enchantment, 206
fences
animals, 126
farming, 104, 109, 112
gates, 172
286 fermented spider eye potion
fermented spider eye potion, 214
fi ghting
armor
crafting, 98-100
critical hits, 94
damage absorption, 99
arrows and bows
arrow slits, 157
crafting, 96
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting, 98
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
skeletons, 88, 96
target practice, 98
combat category (Creative mode
inventory), 68
critical hits, 94
creepers, 89-90, 102
critical hits, 94
enchantments, 204-205
Ender Dragon, 246-249
Endermen, 91
hostile mobs, 84
iron golems, 93-94
Peaceful mode, resting via, 57
skeletons, 87-89
slimes, 90-91
snow golems, 92-93
spiders, 86-87
cave spiders, 88-89
spider jockeys, 89
sprinting and, 95
swords
blocking attacks, 95
crafting, 32, 95
damage, dealing, 95
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting with, 56
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
zombies, 84-85
zombie pigmen, 91-92
fi nding
blaze rods, 234
building sites, 63
End strongholds, The, 244-245
mods, 265
Nether fortresses, 238
villages, 219
Fire Aspect enchantment, 205
fi replaces, building, 146
Fire Protection enchantment, 206
Fire Resistance potion, 213
fi rst night, surviving
building
beds, 41-43
crafting tables, 29-30, 35
furnaces, 38-39
shelter, 33-38
crafting
axes, 32
crafting table, 29-30, 35
heat sources, 37-38
light sources, 37-41
pickaxes, 32
shovels, 33
swords, 32
tool handles, 30-31
torches, 39-41
fi rst-day tasks, 23-24
inventory, checking, 27-29
island biomes, 26
ocean biomes, 26
perimeter structures as protection, 36
trees, 25-26
wood, gathering, 25-26
gates 287
fi shing, 62, 134
Flame enchantment, 205
fl int and steel
mining fl int, quick mining tips, 97
Nether Portals, 236
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
fl oating blocks, 140
fl ooding, building underwater, 152
fl oors (raised/lowered), building, 145
fl ying while leading animals, 129
FN key, 20
food
animals, 59, 62
bowls, crafting, 124
bread, 62
brewing, 68
cake, 62
cooking, 61
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi shing, 62, 134
foodstuffs category (Creative mode
inventory), 67
harvesting, 59, 62
health and, 58
hunger, 49, 58
meat (rotten) and zombies, 85
mining and, 70
mushroom stew, creating, 124
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
poisoning, 61
raw, eating, 61
spider eyes as food, 86
vegetables, 59
Forge mods, 259-260
fortresses (Nether), 227
fi nding, 238
survival tips, 239-240
Fortune enchantment, 207
fountains, building, 144
frames (item), building, 144
free Minecraft demo version
time span, 7
troubleshooting, 8
furnaces
crafting, 38-39
fueling, 40
minecarts with furnaces (powered
minecarts), 187-188
G
games (new)
biomes
choosing, 16
Far Lands or Bust, 16
game modes
Adventure mode, 17
Creative mode, 17
Hardcore mode, 17
selecting, 14
Survival mode, 16-18
Nether options, confi guring, The, 238
pausing, 25
setup, confi guring, 14-15
worlds
choosing world generation style, 16
creating, 14-15
naming, 14
gates
AND gates, 182-183
as output devices, 172
NOR gates, 182
NOT gates (inverters), 180
OR gates, 181
288 Generate Structures setting
Generate Structures setting
Create New World screen, 14
More World Options, 217
ghasts, 237-240
gifting Minecraft, 11
glowstones
glowstone dust potion, 214
Nether, The, 238
underwater, building, 148-150
gold (material type), 51
golems
iron golems, 93-94
snow golems, 92-93
villages and, 219
gravel
arrows, crafting, 97
mining, 97
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
griefi ng, 140
growing plants. See also brewing; building;
crafting
establishing farms, 108
fantasy trees, 144
hedges, 143
indoor plants, 142
planter boxes, building, 143
trees (fantasy), 144
growth cycles (farming), 110
gunpowder
creepers and, 90
potions, 214
H
halfway stations, 192
handles (tool), crafting, 30-31
Hardcore mode, 17
Hard option (Survival mode), 18
Harming potion, 215
harvesting, 59, 110-112
piston farms, 115
wheat, 62
Healing potion, 213
health
food and, 58
health bar (HUD), 48
hunger and, 58
heat sources, crafting, 37-38
hedges, growing, 143
herding animals, 128
Herobrine, 252
hills, crafting shelter from, 34
Hive multiplayer server, The, 268
hoppers, 193-194
as output devices, 173
hopper minecarts, 187
horses, 127
armor and, 132
Horse Update edition. See PC edition
HUD changes while riding, 50
jumping with, 132
leading, 129
leather, obtaining, 99
riding, 130-132
taming, 130-132
hostile mobs. See mobs
hosting
LAN parties, 265-266
multiplayer servers, 265, 269-271
houses, building
building blocks, 67
decoration blocks, 67
housing codes, 65
inventory 289
huts, 64-65
overhangs and spiders, 64
redstone, 67
HUD (Heads Up Display), 47
armor bar, 48
chat window, 50
debug screen, 50-51
durability stats, viewing, 50
experience bar, 48
health bar, 48
hiding, 50
hunger bar, 49, 58
inventory quick access, 49
oxygen bar, 48
riding animals, HUD changes while riding,
50
hunger
dying from, 63
Easy mode, 58
food
bread, 62
cake, 62
cooking, 61
food poisoning, 61
health and, 58
hunger bar (HUD), 49, 58
Normal diffi culty and, 58
raw meat, eating, 61
saturation, 58
sprinting and, 57-58
Survival mode, 58
huts, 224
building, 64-65
overhangs and spiders, 64
witch huts, 224
hydration
farming, 107-108, 112
permanent watering holes, digging, 109
water harvesters, 119-122
I
indoor plants, growing, 142
Infi nity enchantment, 205
ink (squid), 135
installing
doors, 37
mods, 259-260
resource packs, 256-257
inventory
Armor slots, 27
Crafting grid, 27
Creative mode, 66
brewing, 68
building blocks, 67
Chest icon, 68
combat, 68
compass icon, 68
decoration blocks, 67
foodstuffs, 67
materials, 68
miscellaneous, 67
moving items to Survival mode inventory, 68
redstone, 67
search bar, 68
tools, 68
transportation, 67
discarding items from, 29
evenly distributing items, 29
fi rst-night survival, 27-29
inventory quick access (HUD), 49
Inventory slots, 28
290 inventory
main storage, moving quick access grid
items to, 29
opening, 27, 30
picking up items, 29
placing items in inventory, 29
quick access grid (inventory), 28-29, 73,
235
removing items from, 29
stacking items, 28
storage area, 28
Survival mode, moving items to Creative
mode, 68
inverters (NOT gates), 180
Invisibility potion, 213-215
iron, 52
anvils, crafting, 207
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
iron doors, 36, 235
iron golems
fi ghting, 93-94
villages and, 219
islands
fi rst-night survival, 26
spawn points, building underwater, 149
item frames, building, 144
J - K
jack-o’-lanterns, 235-237
.jar fi les, modes as, 261
joining
LAN parties, 265-266
Minecraft Realms, 268
multiplayer servers, 265-268
jumping, 132
jungle temples, 224-225
Knockback enchantments, 204
L
ladders
2x1 ladder descent, mining and, 74
End survival checklist, The, 243
pausing on, 74
underwater, building, 150
lamps
bedside tables and, 142
redstone lamps, 171
LAN parties (multiplayer games), 265-266
lanterns
Nether, The, 235-237
perimeters, 155
underwater, building, 150
Lapis Lazuli and dyeing, 130
Large Biomes option (structures), 217
launching Minecraft
custom launchers, 11
logins, 13
passwords, 12
usernames, 12
lava pools
furnaces, fueling, 40
mining and, 73, 79
Nether, The, 238
obsidian, mining, 197-199
leading animals, 127-129
leather, obtaining, 99
left-handed control options, 21
Legendary Beasts mod website, 263
levers, 162, 166
librarians, 220
lighting
bedside tables and, 142
caves and tunnels, 64
crafting, 39-41
Minecraft 291
farming and, 104, 110
light sources, crafting, 37-41
mining, 70, 73
Nether, The, 235- 239
perimeters, 155
redstone torches, 161, 167, 178-180
underwater, building, 148-150
Linux, downloading Minecraft, 11
logins, 13
loops (repeater), 184
Looting enchantment, 205
lost, avoid getting
compasses, crafting, 61, 227
debug screen (HUD), 50
maps
numbering maps, 229
REI’s MiniMap mod website, 263
villages, 219
wall maps, 144
zooming in/out maps, 229
lowered fl oors, building, 145
lumberjacking, 26
M
Mac OSX
downloading Minecraft, 11
FN key, 20
magma cubes, 241
main storage (inventory), moving quick
access grid Items to, 29
maps
compasses, crafting, 227
numbering maps, 229
REI’s MiniMap mod website, 263
villages, 219
wall maps, 144
zooming in/out maps, 229
materials category (Creative mode inventory), 68
material strength. See durability
meat (rotten) and zombies, 85
melons, 105
minecarts, 185-186
destroying and reusing, 188
hopper minecarts, 187
powered minecarts, 187-188
rails, building, 159
activated rails, 189
detector rails, 164, 189
halfway stations, 192
mobs, protecting tracks from, 192
normal rails, 188
powered rails, 189-190
T-junctions, 191
zig zags, 190
storage minecarts, 187
TNT minecarts, 187-189
trains, minecarts as, 188
underground rails, 188
Minecraft
cheats, 15
controls
A key, 25
directional keys, 25
D key, 25
E key, 27
Esc key, 25
FN key (Mac OSX), 20
left-handed options, 21
list of controls, 19-20
Q key, 29
Shift key, 74, 81
S key, 25
W key, 25, 56
292 Minecraft
demo version
time span, 7
troubleshooting, 8
downloading, 10-11
game modes
Adventure mode, 17
Creative mode, 17
Hardcore mode, 17
selecting, 14
Survival mode, 16-18
gifting, 11
launching
custom launchers, 11
logins, 13
passwords, 12
usernames, 12
logins, 13
Nether options, confi guring, The, 238
new games
choosing biomes, 16
choosing world generation style, 16
confi guring setup, 14-15
creating worlds, 14-15
naming worlds, 14
selecting game mode, 14
pausing, 25, 74
PC edition, 8, 11
Pocket edition, 8
biomes, 16
crafting in, 31
hiding HUD, 50
purchasing, 10-11
Raspberry Pi edition, 8
updates, 107
Xbox 360 Edition, 8
biomes, 16
crafting in, 31
hiding HUD, 50
Xbox One Edition, 8
Minecraft Realms, joining, 268
mining
2x1 ladder descent, 74
abandoned mineshafts, 226-227
bases, setting up, 81
blocking off areas, 73
branch mines, 79-80
breaking your fall, 75-76
buckets, 70
caves
cave spiders, 88-89
creating caves, 69
existing caves, 69
chests, placing in mines, 81
chunks, 82
cobblestone, 60
do’s and don’ts, 73-74
down, digging straight down, 73
falling and, 73-76
farming underground, 104, 123
fl int, quick mining tips, 97
food, 70
gravel, quick mining tips, 97
ladders, 74
lava pools, 73, 79
lighting, 73
mobs and, 81
netherrack, 237
obsidian, 70, 197-199
ore layers, 71-72
pickaxes, 70
quick access bar, keeping blocks in, 73
safety and, 81
sleep, 81
sneaking around hazards, 81
staging points, 81
mobs 293
staircases
spiral staircases, 77-78
straight staircases, 76-77
strategies for starting, 69
tools, required equipment list, 70
torches, 70, 73
unlit areas, 73
up, digging straight up, 73
way out, knowing, 73
wood blocks and, 70
miscellaneous category (Creative mode
inventory), 67
mobs
avoiding, 57
character vulnerability and inventory
checks, 30
creepers, 56
defending against, 102
fi ghting, 89-90
gunpowder and, 90
swimming and, 90
defi ning, 18
ditches, crossing, 153-155
employing, 155-157
Endermen, 91, 246, 249
farming and animals, 128
inventory checks and character vulnerability, 30
iron golems, 93-94
Legendary Beasts mod website, 263
mining, 81
More Mobs mod website, 264
Nether, The, 236-241
passive mobs
animals as, 59-62
squid, 135
Peaceful mode, 57
pursuit mode, 57
security
ditches, 155
pits, 155-157
tunnels, 155
water, 154
skeletons, 56
arrows and, 88, 96
fi ghting, 87-88
spider jockeys, 89
sleep, 81
slimes, 56, 90-91
snow golems, 92-93
spawners
blaze spawners, 239
disabling, 223
silverfi sh spawners, 245
spiders, 56
cave spiders, 88-89
crossing ditches, 153
defending against, 86
eyes as food, 86
fermented spider eye potions, 214
fi ghting, 86-87
overhangs and, 64
spider jockeys, 89
string, 42, 86
uses for, 86
walls as defense, 86
tracks, protecting from attack, 192
tunnels, 155
types of, 18
underwater bases, 49
water, 154
zombies, 56
arrows, crafting, 97
fi ghting, 84-85
reinforcements, 85
rotten meat, 85
zombie pigmen, 91-92
294 mods
mods, 251
defi ning, 258
fi nding, 265
Forge mods, 259-260
installing, 259-260
.jar fi les, 261
Legendary Beasts website, 263
More Explosives website, 262
More Mobs website, 264
multiple mods, using, 258
permanent effects of, 259
REI’s MiniMap website, 263
removing, 260
restoring games, 259
superheroes website, 262
Too Many Items website, 261
.zip fi les, 261
Mojang accounts
passwords, 10
registering, 8-10
security, 9
monsters
avoiding, 57
blaze spawners, 239
creepers, 56
defending against, 102
fi ghting, 89-90
gunpowder and, 90
swimming and, 90
Endermen, 91, 246, 249
iron golems, 93-94
Legendary Beasts mod website, 263
More Mobs mod website, 264
Peaceful mode, 57
pursuit mode, 57
skeletons, 56
arrows and, 88, 96
as resources, 60
bones, farming benefi ts, 110
fi ghting, 87-88
potions, 215
spider jockeys, 89
wither skeletons, 241
slimes, 56, 90-91
snow golems, 92-93
spiders, 56
cave spiders, 88-89
defending against, 86
eyes as food, 86
fi ghting, 86-87
overhangs and, 64
spider jockeys, 89
string, 86
uses for, 86
walls as defense, 86
zombies, 56
crafting arrows, 97
fi ghting, 84-85
reinforcements, 85
rotten meat, 85
zombie pigmen, 91-92
mooshrooms, 127
More Explosives mod website, 262
More Mobs mod website, 264
moving inventory items between main storage and quick access grid, 29
mules, 127
jumping with, 132
packing, 133
riding, 130-132
taming, 130-132
multicrafting, 36
multiplayer games
Command Block, 267
LAN parties, 265-266
netting 295
Minecraft Realms, joining, 268
multiplayer servers
BeastsMC, 269
Hive, The, 268
hosting, 265, 269-271
joining, 265-268
Phanatic, 269
Shotbow, 268
Supercraft Brothers, 268
superheroes mod website, 262
singleplayer games versus, 13
whitelisted (trusted) players, 140
mushrooms
mushroom stew, 124
Nether, The, 238
music, creating via note blocks, 173
N
navigating
compasses, crafting, 61, 227
debug screen (HUD), 50
End, The, 233
maps
numbering maps, 229
REI’s MiniMap mod website, 263
villages, 219
wall maps, 144
zooming in/out maps, 229
Minecraft controls
FN key (Mac OSX), 20
left-handed options, 21
list of controls, 19-20
Nether, The, 233
negative effect potions, 214-215
negative structures, 222
Nether, The, 24, 231
barricades, building, 239
blaze rods, 234, 239
blazes, 241
blaze spawners, 239
cliffs, 238
Dante’s infl uence on, 242
Ender chests, 232
Ender pearls, 234
fortresses
fi nding, 238
survival tips, 239-240
game options, confi guring, 238
ghasts, 237-240
glowstone, 238
jack-o’-lanterns, 237
lanterns, 237
lava pools, 238
lighting, 237-239
magma cubes, 241
mobs, 236-241
mushrooms, 238
navigating, 233
netherbrick, 238-239
Nether Portal, 236-237
Nether quartz, 238
Nether wart, 209-212, 239
Overworld size comparison to, 242
sleeping in, 242
Sneak key (Left Shift), 238
soul sand, 238
stairs, 237
survival checklist, 234-235
torches, 237-239
tunnels, 237
water, 235
wither skeletons, 241
netting, 145
296 new games
new games
biomes
choosing, 16
Far Lands or Bust, 16
game modes
Adventure mode, 17
Creative mode, 17
Hardcore mode, 17
selecting, 14
Survival mode, 16-18
Nether options, confi guring, The, 238
pausing, 25
setup, confi guring, 14-15
worlds
choosing world generation style, 16
creating, 14-15
naming, 14
night (fi rst), surviving
building
beds, 41-43
crafting table, 29-30, 35
furnaces, 38-39
shelter, 33-38
crafting
axes, 32
crafting table, 29-30, 35
heat sources, 37-38
light sources, 37-41
pickaxes, 32
shovels, 33
swords, 32
tool handles, 30-31
torches, 39-41
fi rst-day tasks, 23-24
inventory, checking, 27-29
island biomes, 26
ocean biomes, 26
perimeter structures as protection, 36
trees
gathering wood, 25-26
lumberjacking, 26
Night Vision potion, 213
NOR gates, 182
Normal diffi culty and hunger, 58
Normal option (Survival mode), 18
note blocks, creating music, 173
NOT gates (inverters), 180
O
obsidian
enchantment tables, 197-199
End survival checklist, The, 243
mining, 70, 197-199
Nether Portals, building, 236
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
oceans, fi rst-night survival, 26
ocelots (cats), 127
online resources, Far Lands or Bust, 16
opening
doors, 36
inventory, 27, 30
OR gates, 181
OSX (Mac)
FN key, 20
Minecraft, downloading, 11
overhangs and spiders, 64
Overworld, 24, 242
Ovo’s Rustic resource pack, 257
oxygen bar (HUD), 48
oxygen, building underwater, 150
P
pack animals, 133
paintings, 144
potions 297
passive mobs
animals as, 59-62
squid, 135
passwords, 12
pausing games, 25, 74
PC edition (Minecraft), 8, 11
Peaceful mode, 57
Peaceful option (Survival mode), 17
pearls (Ender), 91, 234
perimeters, building, 36
arrow slits, 157
ditches, 153-154
fences, 104, 109, 112, 126
lighting, 155
mobs, 155-157
towers, 155
walls, 157
Phanatic multiplayer server, 269
pickaxes
crafting, 32
mining and, 70
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
picking-up items in inventory, 29
pigmen (zombie), 91-92, 236-237, 240
pigs, 127, 134
pillar jumping, 38, 65
piston farms, 113
crop selection, 116
harvesting, 115
piston harvesters, 117-118
sticky piston harvesters, 119
sugar cane, 122
water harvesters, 119-122
pistons
as output devices, 172
sliding doors, 178
pits, building, 155-157
pixels per texture (resource packs), 257
planks (wood), crafting, 29
plants, growing
establishing farms, 108
fantasy trees, 144
hedges, 143
indoor plants, 142
planter boxes, building, 143
trees (fantasy), 144
Pocket edition (Minecraft), 8
biomes, 16
crafting in, 31
hiding HUD, 50
poison
food poisoning, 61
Poison potion, 215
rotting meat and zombies, 85
spider eyes, 86
ponds, 144
pools, 144
pop-ups, downloading resource packs, 258
portals
End Portals, 245
Nether Portal, 236, 237
positive effect potions, 213-215
potatos, 105
potions
awkward potion, 212-213
brewing, 209
blaze rossa, 210
building brewing stands, 212
Nether wart, 209-212
soul sand, 209-211
testing potions, 210
End survival checklist, The, 243
enhancing, 214-215
298 potions
fermented spider eye potion, 214
Fire Resistance potion, 21
glowstone dust potion, 214
gunpowder, 214
Harming potion, 215
Healing potion, 213
Invisibility potion, 213-215
negative effect potions, 214-215
Night Vision potion, 213
Poison potion, 215
positive effect potions, 213-215
redstone dust potion, 214
Regeneration potion, 213
skeletons, 215
Slowness potion, 215
Splash potion, 214
Swiftness potion, 213
testing, 210
Weakness potion, 215
zombies, 215
powered blocks, 166-167
powered minecarts, 187-188
powered rails, 172, 189-190
Power enchantment, 205
power sources, 160, 170
powered blocks, 166-167
redstone, 162
powered rails, 189-190
redstone wire, properties of, 164
repeaters, 168-169
torches, 161, 167
repeaters, 168-169
pressure plates, 162. See also buttons
automatic doors, 176
detector rails, 189
minecart rails, 163
pits, 156
priests, 220
Projectile Protection enchantment, 206
Protection enchantments, 205-206
pumpkins, 105
Punch enchantment, 205
purchasing Minecraft, 10-11
pursuit mode, mobs and, 57
PvP (player versus player). See multiplayer
games
Q - R
Q key, 29
quick access grid (inventory), 28-29, 73,
235
rails, 159
activated rails, 189
detector rails, 163-164, 189
halfway stations, 192
minecarts, 185-186
destroying and reusing, 188
hopper minecarts, 187
powered minecarts, 187-188
storage minecarts, 187
TNT minecarts, 187-189
trains, 188
mobs, protecting rails from, 192
normal rails, 188
powered rails, 172, 189-190
pressure plates, 163
T-junctions, 191
trains, minecarts as, 188
underground rails, 188
zig zags, 190
rain, fi shing in, 134
raised beds (farming), 104, 111-112
raised fl oors, building, 145
security 299
Raspberry Pi Edition (Minecraft), 8
ravines, 222
Realms (Minecraft), joining, 268
redstone, 67, 159-160, 170
automated farms, building, 116
piston farms, creating, 116
powered rails, 189-190
redstone blocks, 162
redstone dust potion, 214
redstone lamps, 171
redstone torches, 161, 167, 178-180
redstone wire, 164
repeaters, 168-169, 174
sticky piston harvesters, building, 119
Regeneration potion, 213
registering Mojang accounts, 8
passwords, 10
security questions, 9
REI’s MiniMap mod website, 263
removing
inventory items, 29
mods, 260
renaming items, anvils and, 209
repairing
anvils and, 209
enchantment items, 201
repeater loops, 184
repeaters, 168-169, 174
resetting biomes, 26
resource packs, 138, 251, 255
Dokucraft, 256-257
downloading and pop-ups, 258
Faithful 32, 257
functionality, 256
installing, 256-257
Ovo2s Rustic, 257
pixels per texture, 257
respawning, 18, 63
cheats, 42
spawn points, building underwater, 149
Respiration enchantment, 153, 206
resting, Peaceful mode, 57
restoring games, 259
reusing destroyed minecarts, 188
riding animals, 50, 130-132
rotten meat and zombies, 85
running, 56
combat and, 95
effects of, 57-58
hunger and, 57-58
S
S key, 25
safety, mining and, 81
saturation, hunger and, 58
saving crops, 111
search bar (Creative mode inventory), 68
security
arrow slits, building, 157
ditches, building, 153-154
Minecraft passwords, 12
mobs
ditches, 155
tunnels, 155
water, 154
Mojang accounts
passwords, 10
security questions, 9
perimeters, building
arrow slits, 157
ditches, 153-154
lighting, 155
300 security
mobs, 155-157
towers, 155
walls, 157
pits, building, 155-157
pressure plates, 156
towers, building, 155
underwater, building, 153
walls, building, 157
water, 154
seeds
farming, 103
planting, 108
servers (multiplayer)
BeastsMC, 269
Hive, The, 268
hosting, 265, 269-271
joining, 265-268
Phanatic, 269
Shotbow, 268
Supercraft Brothers, 268
whitelisted (trusted) players, 140
setup
Mojang accounts, 8-10
new games, 14-15
Sharpness enchantment, 204
sheep and wool, 42-43, 127, 130
shelter
building, 33-34
building blocks, 67
caves, 34
cliffs, 34
decoration blocks, 67
doors, 36-37
emergency shelters, 38
heat sources, crafting, 37-38
hills, 34
housing codes, 65
huts, building, 64-65
light sources, crafting, 37-41
overhangs and spiders, 64
pillar jumping, 38
redstone, 67
tunneling, 34
Shift key
ladders, pausing on, 74
sneaking around hazards, 81
Shotbow multiplayer server, 268
shovels, 33, 234
signals, 160
buttons, 162
automatic doors, 173
powered blocks, 166
detector rails, 164, 189
levers, 162, 166
pressure plates
automatic doors, 176
detector rails, 189
minecart rails, 163
weighted pressure plates, 162
redstone torches, 161, 167
tripwires, 163
signs
placement of, 141
underwater, building, 150
Silk Touch enchantment, 207
silverfi sh spawners, 245
singleplayer games
Adventure mode, 17
Creative mode, 17
Hardcore mode, 17
multiplayer games versus, 13
sprinting 301
Survival mode, 16
Easy option, 18
Hard option, 18
Normal option, 18
Peaceful option, 17
skeletons, 56
arrows and, 88, 96
as resources, 60
bones, farming benefi ts, 110 fi ghting, 87-88
potions, 215
spider jockeys, 89
wither skeletons, 241
skins, 251
changing, 252-255
skin editor websites
Minecraftskins, 253
Novaskin, 254
Skincraft, 253
superhero skins, 262
Steve, 252
sleep
beds
building, 41-43
taking with you, 44
End, The, 242-243
mining and, 81
mobs and, 81
Nether, The, 242
time and, 42
villages and, 219
sliding doors, building, 177-179
slimes, 56, 90-91
Slowness potion, 215
Smite enchantment, 204
sneaking
around hazards, 81
farming and, 111
Sneak key (Left Shift), 238
snow blocks, 235
snow golems, 92-93
soft blocks, building underwater, 148, 152
soil, farming, 104
soul sand
brewing potions, 209-211
Nether, The, 238
spawners
blaze spawners, 239
disabling, 223
silverfi sh spawners, 245
spawning, 18, 63
cheats, 42
spawn points, building underwater, 149
spiders, 56
cave spiders, 88-89
defending against, 86
ditches, crossing, 153
eyes
as food, 86
fermented spider eye potions, 214
fi ghting, 86-87
overhangs and, 64
spider jockeys, 89
string, 42, 86
uses for, 86
walls as defense, 86
spiral staircases and mining, 77-78
Splash potion, 214
sprinting, 56
combat and, 95
effects of, 57-58
hunger and, 57-58
302 squid
squid, 135
stacking inventory items, 28
staging points, mining and, 81
staircases and mining
Nether, The, 237
spiral staircases, 77-78
straight staircases, mining and, 76-77
stations (halfway), 192
steel and fl int
Nether Portals, 236
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
Steve (character skin), 252
stew, 124
sticky piston harvesters, 119
stone buttons, 162
automatic doors, 173
powered blocks, 166
stone (material type), 52
storage
storage area (inventory), 28
chests, 54-55
enchantments, storing in books, 202
storage minecarts, 187
straight staircases and mining, 76-77
Strength potion, 213
string (spiders), 42, 86
strongholds, 226, 244-245
structures
basins, 222
caverns, 222
desert temples, 223-224
dungeons, 225-226
End strongholds, The, 244-245
Generate Structures setting
Create New World screen, 14
More World Options, 217
jungle temples, 224-225
Large Biomes option, 217
mineshafts (abandoned), 226-227
negative structures, 222
Nether fortresses, 227
fi nding, 238
survival tips, 239-240
ravines, 222
spawners, disabling, 223
strongholds, 226
villages
appearances of, 218
beds, 219
blacksmiths, 220
butchers, 220
children, 218, 221
commonality of, 217
farmers, 220
fi nding, 219
interacting with inhabitants, 218-221
iron golems and, 219
librarians, 220
priests, 220
sleeping in, 219
trading with inhabitants, 219-221
uses of, 218
zombies and, 218-219, 222
witch huts, 224
subscription services, 268
subtract mode (comparators), 170
sugar cane, 106
automated farms, 122
growing, 104
piston farms, 122
Supercraft Brothers multiplayer server, 268
superhero mods website, 262
tools 303
survival
fi rst night survival
axes, 32
beds, 41-43
crafting tables, 29-30, 35
fi rst-day tasks, 23-24
furnaces, 38-39
heat sources, 37-38
inventory, checking, 27-29
island biomes, 26
light sources, 37-41
ocean biomes, 26
perimeter structures as protection, 36
pickaxes, 32
shelter, 33-38
shovels, 33
swords, 32
tool handles, 30-31
torches, 39-41
trees, 25-26
wood, gathering, 25-26
Survival mode, 16
Easy option, 18
Hard option, 18
hunger, 58
moving items to Creative mode inventory, 68
Normal option, 18
Peaceful option, 17
underwater, building, 148
Swiftness potion, 213
swimming
creepers and, 90
swimming pools, 144
switches, 114, 142, 161-162
swords
blocking attacks, 95
crafting, 32, 95
damage, dealing, 95
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting with, 56
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
T
tables
bedside tables, 142
crafting tables, 29-30, 35
dining tables, 142
enchantment tables, 197
books, 200
casting enchantments, 200-201
obsidian, 197-199
taming animals, 127, 130-132
teleporting players into LAN parties, 266
temples
desert temples, 223-224
jungle temples, 224-225
tennis courts, building, 145
testing potions, 210
texture packs. See resource packs
textures, pixels per (resource packs), 257
Thorns enchantment, 206
time, sleeping and, 42
T-junctions, building tracks, 191
TNT minecarts, 187, 189
tools
axes, 32
durability, 53
enchantments, 206-207
End survival checklist, The, 243
handles, 30-31
improving, 51-52
mining, required equipment list, 70
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
pickaxes, 32, 70
shovels, 33
304 tools
tools category (Creative mode inventory),
68
wearing down, 53
Too Many Items mod website, 261
torches
bedside tables and, 142
crafting, 39-41
farming and lighting, 104, 110
mining, 70, 73
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
Nether, The, 237-239
perimeters, 155
redstone torches, 161
powered blocks, 167
vertical current, 178-180
underwater, building, 148-150
towers, building, 155
tracks, 159
activated rails, 189
detector rails, 163-164, 189
halfway stations, 192
minecarts, 185-186
destroying and reusing, 188
hopper minecarts, 187
powered minecarts, 187-188
storage minecarts, 187
TNT minecarts, 187-189
trains, 188
mobs, protecting rails from, 192
normal rails, 188
powered rails, 172, 189-190
pressure plates, 163
T-junctions, 191
trains, minecarts as, 188
underground rails, 188
zig zags, 190
trading
End, The, trading versus fi ghting, 234
with village inhabitants, 219-221
trains, 159
activated rails, 189
detector rails, 163-164, 189
halfway stations, 192
minecarts, 185-189
mobs, protecting rails from, 192
normal rails, 188
powered rails, 172, 189-190
pressure plates, 163
T-junctions, 191
trains, minecarts as, 188
underground rails, 188
zig zags, 190
trapdoors, 172
trapped chests, 163
treasure
abandoned mineshafts, 226-227
desert temples, 223-224
dungeons, 225-226
emeralds, farming, 222
Ender pearls, 234
jungle temples, 224-225
Nether fortresses, 227
spawners, disabling, 223
strongholds, 226
witch huts, 224
trees
biomes, 25
fantasy trees, growing, 144
fi rst-night survival, 25
lumberjacking, 26
tripwires, 163
trusted (whitelisted) players, 140
walls 305
tunnels, 34
abandoned mineshafts, 226-227
ditches and, 155
doors, 85
lighting, 64
Nether, The, 237
underground rails, 188
U
Unbreaking enchantment, 207
underground
abandoned mineshafts, 226-227
dungeons, 225-226
rails, 188
strongholds, 226
underwater, building, 151
Creative mode, 147
doors, 150
enchantments, 153
fl ooding, 152
island spawn points, 149
ladders, 150
lighting, 148-150
location, 149
mob attacks, 49
oxygen, 150
required equipment, 148-149
security, 153
signs, 150
soft blocks, 148, 152
Survival mode, 148
up, digging straight down, 73
usernames (Minecraft), 12
V
vandalism, 140
vegetables, harvesting, 59
vertical current, 178-180
video cards (Minecraft PC edition), 8
Video Settings menu (game options),
confi guring The Nether options, 238
villages
appearances of, 218
beds, 219
blacksmiths, 220
building next to, 139
butchers, 220
children, 218, 221
commonality of, 217
farmers, 220
fi nding, 219
interacting with inhabitants, 218-221
iron golems and, 219
librarians, 220
priests, 220
sleeping in, 219
trading with inhabitants, 219-221
uses of, 218
wells, 222
zombies and, 218-219, 222
W
W key, 25, 56
walls
building, 65, 157
clocks, 144
maps, 144
spider-proof walls, 86
306 water
water
Aqua Affi nity enchantment, 206
boats, building, 134
farming, 107-108, 112
fi shing, 134
fountains, 144
Nether, The, 235
obsidian, mining, 197-199
permanent watering holes, digging, 109
ponds, 144
pools, 144
security, 154
underwater, building, 151
Creative mode, 147
doors, 150
enchantments, 153
fl oating blocks, 139-140
fl ooding, 152
island spawn points, 149
ladders, 150
lighting, 148-150
location, 149
oxygen, 150
required equipment, 148-149
security, 153
signs, 150
soft blocks, 148, 152
Survival mode, 148
water harvesters, 119-122
wells, 222
Weakness potion, 215
weapons, 94
arrows and bows
arrow slits, 157
crafting, 96
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting, 98
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
skeletons, 88, 96
target practice, 98
critical hits, 94
enchantments, 204-205
Ender Dragon, defeating, 246-249
End survival checklist, The, 243
Nether survival checklist, The, 234-235
Peaceful mode, resting via, 57
swords
blocking attacks, 95
crafting, 32, 95
damage, 95
End survival checklist, The, 243
fi ghting with, 56
Nether survival checklist, The, 234
web resources
Far Lands or Bust, 16
mods
fi nding, 265
Legendary Beasts website, 263
More Explosives website, 262
More Mobs website, 264
REI’s MiniMap website, 263
superheroes website, 262
Too Many Items website, 261
multiplayer server websites
BeastsMC, 269
Hive, The, 268
Phanatic, 269
Shotbow, 268
Supercraft Brothers, 268
skin editors
Minecraftskins, 253
Novaskin, 254
Skincraft, 253
superheroes, 262
zooming in/out maps 307
weighted pressure plates, 162
wells, 222
wheat, 106, 222
farming, 103
growth cycles, 110
harvesting, 62, 110-112
whitelisted (trusted) players, 140
witch huts, 224
wither skeletons, 241
wolves, 127
wood blocks, 52
gathering, fi rst-night survival, 25-26
mining and, 70
Nether survival checklist, The, 235
planks, crafting, 29
wood buttons, 162
automatic doors, 173
powered blocks, 166
wool
crafting, 42-43
dyeing, 130
spider string instead of, 42
worlds
biomes
choosing, 16
Far Lands or Bust, 16
pocket edition, 16
Xbox 360 Edition, 16
creating, 14-15
naming, 14
Overworld, 24
world generation style, choosing, 16
World Type setting (Create New World
screen), 14
X
Xbox 360 Edition (Minecraft), 8
biomes, 16
crafting in, 31
HUD, hiding, 50
Xbox One Edition (Minecraft), 8
XP (experience points)
earning, 203-204
enchantments, 195, 200
managing, 203-204
Y - Z
YouTube, fi nding architectural plans, 140
zig-zag tracks, building, 190
.zip fi les, mods as, 261
zombies, 56
arrows, crafting, 97
fi ghting, 84-85
potions, 215
reinforcements, 85
rotten meat, 85
villages and, 218-219, 222
wells, 222
zombie pigmen
fi ghting, 91-92
Nether, The, 236-237, 240
zooming in/out maps, 229